I came into the world during the Tet Offensive, in the early 
days of the Year of the Monkey, when the long chains of 
firecrackers draped in front of houses exploded 
polyphonically along with the sound of machine guns. 

I first saw the light of day in Saigon, where firecrackers, 
fragmented into a thousand shreds, coloured the ground 
red like the petals of cherry blossoms or like the blood of 
the two million soldiers deployed and scattered throughout 
the villages and cities of a Vietnam that had been ripped in 
two. 

I was born in the shadow of skies adorned with fireworks, 
decorated with garlands of light, shot through with rockets 
and missiles. The purpose of my birth was to replace lives 
that had been lost. My life’s duty was to prolong that of my 
mother. 



My name is Nguyen An Tjnh, my mother’s name is 
Nguyen An TTnh. My name is simply a variation on hers 
because a single dot under the / differentiates, 
distinguishes, dissociates me from her. I was an extension 
of her, even in the meaning of my name. In Vietnamese, 
hers means “peaceful environment” and mine “peaceful 
interior.” With those almost interchangeable names, my 
mother confirmed that I was the sequel to her, that I would 
continue her story. 

The History of Vietnam, written with a capital H, thwarted 
my mother’s plans. History flung the accents on our names 
into the water when it took us across the Gulf of Siam thirty 
years ago. It also stripped our names of their meaning, 
reducing them to sounds at once strange, and strange to 
the French language. In particular, when I was ten years old 
it ended my role as an extension of my mother. 



Because of our exile, my children have never been 
extensions of me, of my history. Their names are Pascal 
and Henri, and they don’t look like me. They have hair that's 
lighter in colour than mine, white skin, thick eyelashes. I did 
not experience the natural feelings of motherhood I’d 
expected when they were clamped onto my breasts at 3 
a.m., in the middle of the night. The maternal instinct came 
to me much later, over the course of sleepless nights, dirty 
diapers, unexpected smiles, sudden delights. 

Only then did I understand the love of the mother sitting 
across from me in the hold of our boat, the head of the baby 
in her arms covered with foul-smelling scabies. That image 
was before my eyes for days and maybe nights as well. The 
small bulb hanging from a wire attached to a rusty nail 
spread a feeble, unchanging light. Deep inside the boat 
there was no distinction between day and night. The 
constant illumination protected us from the vastness of the 
sea and the sky all around us. The people sitting on deck 
told us there was no boundary between the blue of the sky 
and the blue of the sea. No one knew if we were heading 
for the heavens or plunging into the water’s depths. Heaven 
and hell embraced in the belly of our boat. Heaven 
promised a turning point in our lives, a new future, a new 
history. Hell, though, displayed our fears: fear of pirates, 
fear of starvation, fear of poisoning by biscuits soaked in 
motor oil, fear of running out of water, fear of being unable 
to stand up, fear of having to urinate in the red pot that was 
passed from hand to hand, fear that the scabies on the 
baby’s head was contagious, fear of never again setting 
foot on solid ground, fear of never again seeing the faces of 
our parents, who were sitting in the darkness surrounded by 
two hundred people. 



Before our boat had weighed anchor in the middle of the 
night on the shores of Rach Gia, most of the passengers 
had just one fear: fear of the Communists, the reason for 
their flight. But as soon as the vessel was surrounded, 
encircled by the uniform blue horizon, fear was transformed 
into a hundred-faced monster who sawed off our legs and 
kept us from feeling the stiffness in our immobilized 
muscles. We were frozen in fear, by fear. We no longer 
closed our eyes when the scabious little boy’s pee sprayed 
us. We no longer pinched our noses against our 
neighbours’ vomit. We were numb, imprisoned by the 
shoulders of some, the legs of others, the fear of everyone. 
We were paralyzed. 

The story of the little girl who was swallowed up by the 
sea after she’d lost her footing while walking along the 
edge spread through the foul-smelling belly of the boat like 
an anaesthetic or laughing gas, transforming the single bulb 
into a polar star and the biscuits soaked in motor oil into 
butter cookies. The taste of oil in our throats, on our 
tongues, in our heads sent us to sleep to the rhythm of the 
lullaby sung by the woman beside me. 



IVI y father had made plans, should our family be captured 
by Communists or pirates, to put us to sleep forever, like 
Sleeping Beauty, with cyanide pills. For a long time 
afterwards, I wanted to ask why he hadn't thought of letting 
us choose, why he would have taken away our possibility of 
survival. 

I stopped asking myself that question when I became a 
mother, when Dr. Vinh, a highly regarded surgeon in 
Saigon, told me how he had put his five children, one after 
the other, from the boy of twelve to the little girl of five, 
alone, on five different boats, at five different times, to send 
them off to sea, far from the charges of the Communist 
authorities that hung over him. He was certain he would die 
in prison because he’d been accused of killing some 
Communist comrades by operating on them, even if they'd 
never set foot in his hospital. He hoped to save one, maybe 
two of his children by launching them in this fashion onto the 
sea. I met Dr. Vinh on the church steps, which he cleared of 
snow in the winter and swept in the summer to thank the 
priest who had acted as father to his children, bringing up 
all five, one after the other, until they were grown, until the 
doctor got out of prison. 



I didn't cry out and I didn’t weep when I was told that my 
son Henri was a prisoner in his own world, when it was 
confirmed that he is one of those children who don’t hear 
us, don’t speak to us, even though they’re neither deaf nor 
mute. He is also one of those children we must love from a 
distance, neither touching, nor kissing, nor smiling at them 
because every one of their senses would be assaulted by 
the odour of our skin, by the intensity of our voices, the 
texture of our hair, the throbbing of our hearts. Probably he'll 
never call me maman lovingly, even if he can pronounce 
the word poire with all the roundness and sensuality of the 
o/ sound. He will never understand why I cried when he 
smiled for the first time. He won’t know that, thanks to him, 
every spark of joy has become a blessing and that I will 
keep waging war against autism, even if I know already that 
it’s invincible. 

Already, I am defeated, stripped bare, beaten down. 



vv hen I saw my first snowbanks through the porthole of 
the plane at Mirabel Airport, then too I felt naked, if not 
stripped bare. In spite of my short-sleeved orange pullover 
purchased at the refugee camp in Malaysia before we left 
for Canada, in spite of my loose-knit brown sweater made 
by Vietnamese women, I was naked. Several of us on the 
plane made a dash for the windows, our mouths agape, our 
expressions stunned. After such a long time in places 
without light, a landscape so white, so virginal could only 
dazzle us, blind us, intoxicate us. 

I was as surprised by all the unfamiliar sounds that 
greeted us as by the size of the ice sculpture watching over 
a table covered with canapes, hors d’oeuvre, tasty morsels, 
each more colourful than the last. I recognized none of the 
dishes, yet I knew that this was a place of delights, an idyllic 
land. I was like my son Henri: unable to talk or to listen, 
even though I was neither deaf nor mute. I now had no 
points of reference, no tools to allow me to dream, to 
project myself into the future, to be able to experience the 
present, in the present. 



IVI y first teacher in Canada walked with us, the seven 
youngest in the group of Vietnamese, across the bridge 
that led to the present. She watched over our 
transplantation with all the sensitivity of a mother for her 
premature baby. We were hypnotized by the slow and 
reassuring swaying of her shapely hips, her round and 
generous behind. Like a mother duck, she walked ahead of 
us, asking us to follow her to the haven where we would be 
children again, simply children, surrounded by colours, 
drawings, trivia. I will be forever grateful to her for giving me 
my first desire as an immigrant: to be able to sway my bum 
the way she did. Not one of the Vietnamese in our group 
possessed such opulence, such generosity, such 
nonchalance in her curves. We were all angular, bony, hard. 
And so when she bent down to me, placing her hands on 
mine to tell me, “My name is Marie-France, what’s yours?” I 
repeated each of her syllables without blinking, without 
needing to understand, because I was lulled by a cloud of 
coolness, of lightness, of sweet perfume. I hadn’t 
understood a word she’d said, only the melody of her voice, 
but it was enough. More than enough. 



w hen I got home, I repeated the same sequence of 
sounds to my parents: "My name is Marie-France, what’s 
yours?” They asked me if I’d changed my name. It was at 
that split second that my present reality caught up to me, 
when the deafness and muteness of the moment erased 
my dreams and thus the power to look ahead, to look far 
ahead. 

My parents, though they already spoke French, could not 
look far ahead either, for they’d been expelled from the 
Introduction to French course, that is, struck off the list of 
people who would receive an allowance of forty dollars a 
week. They were overqualified for the course but 
underqualified for everything else. Unable to look ahead of 
themselves, they looked ahead of us, for us, their children. 



I or us, they didn’t see the blackboards they wiped clean, 
the school toilets they scrubbed, the imperial rolls they 
delivered. They saw only what lay ahead. And so to make 
progress my brothers and I followed where their eyes led 
us. I met parents whose gaze had been extinguished, some 
beneath the weight of a pirate’s body, others during the all 
too many years of Communist re-education camps—not 
the war camps during the war, but the peacetime camps 
after the war. 



As a child, I thought that war and peace were opposites. 
Yet I lived in peace when Vietnam was in flames and I didn't 
experience war until Vietnam had laid down its weapons. I 
believe that war and peace are actually friends, who mock 
us. They treat us like enemies when it suits them, with no 
concern for the definition or the role we give them. Perhaps, 
then, we shouldn’t take too much stock in the appearance 
of one or the other to decide our views. I was lucky enough 
to have parents who were able to hold their gaze steady, no 
matter the mood of the moment. My mother often recited 
the proverb that was written on the blackboard of her 
eighth-grade class in Saigon: Doi la chien tran, neu buon la 
thua. Life is a struggle in vihich sorrow leads to defeat. 



My mother waged her first battles later, without sorrow. 
She went to work for the first time at the age of thirty-four, 
first as a cleaning lady, then at jobs in plants, factories, 
restaurants. Before, in the life that she had lost, she was the 
eldest daughter of her prefect father. All she did was settle 
arguments between the French-food chef and the 
Vietnamese-food chef in the family courtyard. Or she 
assumed the role of judge in the secret love affairs between 
maids and menservants. Otherwise, she spent her 
afternoons doing her hair, applying her makeup, getting 
dressed to accompany my father to social events. Thanks 
to the extravagant life she lived, she could dream all the 
dreams she wanted, especially those she dreamed for us. 
She was preparing my brothers and me to become 
musicians, scientists, politicians, athletes, artists and 
polyglots, all at the same time. 

However, far from us, blood still flowed and bombs still 
fell, so she taught us to get down on our knees like the 
servants. Every day, she made me wash four tiles on the 
floor and clean twenty sprouted beans by removing their 
roots one by one. She was preparing us for the collapse. 
She was right to do so, because very soon we no longer 
had a floor beneath our feet. 



During our first nights as refugees in Malaysia, we slept 
right on the red earth, without a floor. The Red Cross had 
built refugee camps in the countries adjoining Vietnam to 
receive the boat people—those who had survived the sea 
journey. The others, those who'd gone down during the 
crossing, had no names. They died anonymously. We were 
among those who had been lucky enough to wash up on dry 
land. We felt blessed to be among the two thousand 
refugees in a camp that was intended to hold two hundred. 



vv e built a cabin on piles in an out-of-the-way part of the 
camp, on the side of a hill. For weeks, twenty-five members 
of five families working together, in secret, felled some 
trees in the nearby woods, then planted them in the soft clay 
soil, attached them to six plywood panels to make a large 
floor, and covered the frame with a canvas of electric blue, 
plastic blue, toy blue. We had the good fortune to find 
enough burlap and nylon rice bags to surround the four 
sides of our cabin, as well as the three sides of our shared 
bathroom. Together, the two structures resembled a 
museum installation by a contemporary artist. At night, we 
slept pressed so close together that we were never cold, 
even without a blanket. During the day, the heat absorbed 
by the blue plastic made the air in our cabin suffocating. On 
rainy days and nights, the water came in through holes 
pierced by the leaves, twigs and stems that we’d added to 
cool it down. 

If a choreographer had been underneath the plastic sheet 
on a rainy day or night, he would certainly have reproduced 
the scene: twenty-five people, short and tall, on their feet, 
each holding a tin can to collect the water that dripped off 
the roof, sometimes in torrents, sometimes drop by drop. If 
a musician had been there, he would have heard the 
orchestration of all that water striking the sides of the tins. If 
a filmmaker had been there, he would have captured the 
beauty of the silent and spontaneous complicity between 
wretched people. But there was only us, standing on a floor 
that was slowly sinking into the clay. After three months it 
tilted so severely to one side that we all had to find new 
positions so sleeping women and children wouldn’t slip 
onto the plump bellies of their neighbours. 



In spite of all those nights when our dreams spilled onto 
the sloping floor, my mother still had high hopes for our 
future. She'd found an accomplice. He was young and 
certainly naive because he dared to flaunt joy and light¬ 
heartedness in the midst of our dull and empty daily lives. 
Together, he and my mother started an English class. We 
spent whole mornings with him, repeating words we didn’t 
understand. But we all showed up because he was able to 
raise the sky and give us a glimpse of a new horizon, far 
from the gaping holes filled with the excrement of the 
camp's two thousand people. Without his face, we could 
never have imagined a horizon without flies, worms and 
nauseating smells. Without his face, we couldn't have 
imagined that someday we would no longer eat rotting fish 
flung down late every afternoon when rations were handed 
out. Without his face, we would certainly have lost the 
desire to reach out our hands and catch our dreams. 



Unfortunately, from all the mornings with this impromptu 
English teacher, I remembered only one sentence: My boat 
number is KG0338. It turned out to be totally useless 
because I never had a chance to say it, not even during the 
medical examination by the Canadian delegation. The 
doctor on call didn’t speak a word to me. He tugged the 
elastic of my pants to confirm my sex instead of asking, 
Boy or girl? I also knew those two words. The appearance 
of a ten-year-old boy and a ten-year-old girl must have been 
much the same, because of our scrawniness. And time was 
short: there were so many of us on the other side of the 
door. It was terribly hot in the small examining room with its 
windows open onto a noisy alley where hundreds of water 
buckets collided at the pump. We were covered with 
scabies and lice and we all looked lost, beyond our depth. 

In any case, I spoke very little, sometimes not at all. 
Throughout my early childhood, my cousin Sao Mai always 
spoke on my behalf because I was her shadow: the same 
age, the same class, the same sex, but her face was on the 
bright side and mine on the side of darkness, shadow, 
silence. 



IVI y mother wanted me to talk, to learn French as fast as 
possible, English too, because my mother tongue had 
become not exactly insufficient, but useless. Starting in my 
second year in Quebec, she sent me to a military garrison 
of anglophone cadets. It was a way that I could learn 
English for free, she told me. But she was wrong, it wasn’t 
free. I paid for it, dearly. There were around forty cadets, all 
of them tall, bursting with energy and, above all, teenagers. 
They took themselves seriously when inspecting in minute 
detail the fold of a collar, the angle of a beret, the shine of a 
boot. The oldest ones yelled at the youngest. They played 
at war, at the absurd, without understanding. And I didn't 
understand them. Nor did I understand why the name of the 
cadet next to me was repeated in a loop by our superior. 
Maybe he wanted me to remember the name of that 
teenage boy who was twice my height. My first 
conversation in English started with me saying to him at the 
end of the session: “Bye, Asshole.” 



My mother often put me in situations of extreme shame. 
Once, she asked me to go and buy sugar at the grocery 
store just below our first apartment. I went but found no 
sugar. My mother sent me back and even locked the door 
behind me: “Don’t come back without the sugar!” She had 
forgotten that I was a deaf-mute. I sat on the grocery store 
steps until it closed, until the grocer took me by the hand 
and led me to the bag of sugar. He had understood, even if 
to me the word sugar was bitter. 

For a long time, I thought my mother enjoyed constantly 
pushing me right to the edge. When I had my own children, I 
finally understood that I should have seen her behind the 
locked door, eyes pressed against the peephole; I should 
have heard her talking on the phone to the grocer when I 
was sitting on the steps in tears. I also understood later that 
my mother certainly had dreams for me, but above all she'd 
given me tools so that I could put down roots, so that I could 
dream. 



The town of Granby was the warm belly that sheltered us 
during our first year in Canada. The locals cosseted us one 
by one. The pupils in my grade school lined up to invite us 
home for lunch so that each of our noon hours was reserved 
by a family. And every time, we went back to school with 
nearly empty stomachs because we didn’t know how to use 
a fork to eat rice that wasn’t sticky. We didn’t know how to 
tell them that this food was strange to us, that they really 
didn’t have to go to every grocery store in search of the last 
box of Minute Rice. We could neither talk to nor understand 
them. But that wasn’t the main thing. There was generosity 
and gratitude in every grain of the rice left on our plates. To 
this day I still wonder whether words might have tainted 
those moments of grace. And whether feelings are 
sometimes understood better in silence, like the one that 
existed between Claudette and Monsieur Kiet. Their first 
moments together were wordless, yet Monsieur Kiet 
agreed to put his baby into Claudette’s arms without 
questioning: a baby, his baby, whom he’d found on the 
shore after his boat had capsized in an especially greedy 
wave. He had not found his wife, only his son, who was 
experiencing a second birth without his mother. Claudette 
stretched out her arms to them and kept them with her for 
days, for months, for years. 



Johanne held out her hand to me in the same way. She 
liked me even though I wore a tuque with a McDonald’s 
logo, even though I travelled hidden in a cube van with fifty 
other Vietnamese to work in fields around the Eastern 
Townships after school. Johanne wanted me to go to a 
private secondary school with her the following year. Yet 
she knew that I waited every afternoon in the yard of that 
very school for the farmers’ trucks that would take us to 
work illegally in the fields, earning a few dollars in exchange 
for the sacks of beans we picked. 

Johanne also took me to the movies, even though I was 
wearing a shirt bought on sale for eighty-eight cents, with a 
hole near one of the seams. After the film Fame she taught 
me how to sing the theme song in English, “I sing the body 
electric,” although I didn’t understand the words, or her 
conversations with her sister and her parents around their 
fireplace. It was Johanne too who picked me up after my 
first falls when we went ice skating, who applauded and 
shouted my name in the crowd when Serge, a classmate 
three times my size, took me in his arms along with the 
football and scored a touchdown. 

I wonder if I haven’t invented her, that friend of mine. I’ve 
met many people who believe in God, but what I believe in 
is angels, and Johanne was an angel. She was one of an 
army of them who'd been parachuted into town to give us 
shock treatment. By the dozen they showed up at our doors 
to give us warm clothes, toys, invitations, dreams. I often felt 
there wasn’t enough space inside us to receive everything 
we were offered, to catch all the smiles that came our way. 
How could we visit the Granby zoo more than twice each 
weekend? How could we appreciate a camping trip to the 
countryside? Howto savour an omelette with maple syrup? 



I have a photo of my father being embraced by our 
sponsors, a family of volunteers to whom we’d been 
assigned. They spent their Sundays taking us to flea 
markets. They negotiated fiercely on our behalf so we could 
buy mattresses, dishes, beds, sofas—in short, the basics 
—with our three-hundred-dollar government allowance 
meant to furnish our first home in Quebec. One of the 
vendors threw in a red cowl-necked sweater for my father. 
He wore it proudly every day of our first spring in Quebec. 
Today, his broad smile in the photo from that time manages 
to make us forget that it was a woman's sweater, nipped in 
at the waist. Sometimes it’s best not to know everything. 

Of course, there were times when we’d have liked to 
know more. To know, for instance, that in our old 
mattresses there were fleas. But those details don’t matter 
because they don’t show in the pictures. In any case, we 
thought we were immunized against stings, that no flea 
could pierce our skin bronzed by the Malaysian sun. In fact, 
the cold winds and hot baths had purified us, making the 
bites unbearable and the itches bloody. 

We threw out the mattresses without telling our sponsors. 
We didn’t want them to be disappointed, because they’d 
given us their hearts, their time. We appreciated their 
generosity, but not sufficiently: we did not yet know the cost 
of time, its fair market value, its tremendous scarcity. 



For a whole year, Granby represented heaven on earth. I 
couldn't imagine a better place in the world, even if we 
were being eaten alive by flies, just as in the refugee camp. 
A local botanist took us children to swamps where cattails 
grew in the thousands, to show us the insects. He didn’t 
know that we’d rubbed shoulders with flies in the refugee 
camps for months. They clung to the branches of a dead 
tree near the septic tanks, next to our cabin. They 
positioned themselves around the branches like the berries 
of a pepper plant or currants. They were so numerous, so 
enormous, that they didn’t need to fly to be in front of our 
eyes, in our lives. We didn’t need to be silent to hear them. 
Now our botanist guide whispered to us to listen to their 
droning, to try to understand them. 



I know the sound of flies by heart. I just have to close my 
eyes to hear them buzzing around me again, because for 
months I had to crouch down above a gigantic pit filled to 
the brim with excrement, in the blazing sun of Malaysia. I 
had to look at the indescribable brown colour without 
blinking so that I wouldn’t slip on the two planks behind the 
door of one of the sixteen cabins every time I set foot there. 
I had to keep my balance, avoid fainting when my stools or 
those from the next cabin splattered. At those moments I 
escaped by listening to the humming of flies. Once, I lost my 
slipper between the planks after I’d moved my foot too 
quickly. It fell into the cesspit without sinking, floating there 
like a boat cast adrift. 



I went barefoot for days, waiting for my mother to find an 
orphan slipper belonging to another child who’d also lost 
one. I walked directly on the clay soil where maggots had 
been crawling a week before. With every heavy rainfall they 
emerged from the cesspit in the hundreds of thousands, as 
if summoned by a messiah. They all headed for the side of 
our hill and climbed without ever tiring, without ever falling. 
They crawled up to our feet, all to the same rhythm, 
transforming the red clay soil into an undulating white 
carpet. There were so many that we gave up before we’d 
even started to fight. They became invincible, we became 
vulnerable. We let them extend their territory until the rains 
stopped, when they became vulnerable in turn. 



vv hen the Communists entered Saigon, my family 
handed over half of our property because we’d become 
vulnerable. A brick wall was erected to establish two 
addresses: one for us and one for the local police station. 

A year later, the authorities from the new Communist 
administration arrived to clean out our half of the house, to 
clean us out. Inspectors came to our courtyard with no 
warning, no authorization, no reason. They asked all those 
present to gather in the living room. My parents were out, 
so the inspectors waited for them, sitting on the edges of 
art deco chairs, their backs straight, without once touching 
the two white linen squares covered with fine embroidery 
that adorned the armrests. My mother was the first to 
appear behind the wrought iron glass door. She had on her 
white pleated miniskirt and her running shoes. Behind her, 
my father was dragging tennis rackets, his face still 
covered in sweat. The inspectors’ surprise visit had thrown 
us into the present while we were still savouring the last 
moments of the past. All the adults in the household were 
ordered to stay in the living room while the inspectors 
started making their inventory. 

We children could follow them from floor to floor, from 
room to room. They sealed chests of drawers, wardrobes, 
dressing tables, safes. They even sealed the big chests of 
drawers filled with the brassieres of my grandmother and 
her six daughters, without describing the contents. It 
seemed to me then that the young inspector was 
embarrassed at the thought of all those round-breasted 
girls in the living room, dressed in fine lace imported from 
Paris. I also thought that he was leaving the paper blank, 
with no description of the wardrobe’s contents, because he 
was too overwhelmed by desire to write without trembling. 
But I was wrong: he had no idea what brassieres were for. 
In his opinion they looked like his mother’s coffee filters, 



made of cloth sewn around a metal ring, the twisted end of 
which served as a handle. 

At the foot of the Long Bien Bridge that crosses the Red 
River in Hanoi, every night his mother would fill her coffee 
filter then dip it into her aluminum coffee pot to make a few 
cups that she’d sell to passersby. In the winter, she placed 
glasses containing barely three sips into a bowl filled with 
hot water to keep them warm during conversations 
between the men sitting on benches raised just a bit above 
the ground. Her customers spotted her by the flame of her 
tiny oil lamp sitting on the tiny work table, next to three 
cigarettes displayed on a plate. Every morning, the young 
inspector, still a child, woke up with the oft-mended brown 
cloth coffee filter, sometimes still wet and hanging from a 
nail above his head. I heard him talking with the other 
inspectors in a corner of the staircase. He didn’t 
understand why my family had so many coffee filters filed 
away in drawers lined with tissue paper. And why were they 
double? Was it because we always drink coffee with a 
friend? 



The young inspector had been marching in the jungle 
since the age of twelve to free South Vietnam from the 
“hairy hands” of the Americans. He had slept in 
underground tunnels, spent days at a time in a pond, under 
a water lily, seen the bodies of comrades sacrificed to 
prevent cannons from sliding, lived through nights of 
malaria amidst the sound of helicopters and explosions. 
Aside from his mother’s teeth lacquered jet black, he had 
forgotten his parents’ faces. How could he have guessed, 
then, what a brassiere was for? In the jungle, boys and girls 
had exactly the same possessions: a green helmet, 
sandals made from strips of worn-out tires, a uniform, and a 
black and white checked scarf. An inventory of their 
belongings took three seconds, unlike ours, which lasted 
for a year. We had to share our space by taking ten of 
those girl and boy soldier-inspectors into our home. We 
gave them one floor of the house. Each of us lived in our 
own corner, avoiding contact except during the daily 
searches, when we were obliged to stand face to face with 
them. They needed to be sure that we had only the 
essentials, like them. 

One day our ten roomers dragged us to their bathroom, 
accusing us of stealing a fish they’d been given for their 
evening meal. They pointed to the toilet bowl and explained 
to us that the fish had been there that morning, hale and 
hearty. What had become of it? 



Thanks to that fish, we were able to establish 
communication. Later on, my father corrupted them by 
having them listen to music on the sly. I sat underneath the 
piano, in the shadows, watching tears roll down their 
cheeks, where the horrors of History, without hesitation, had 
carved grooves. After that, we no longer knew if they were 
enemies or victims, if we loved or hated them, if we feared 
or pitied them. And they no longer knew if they had freed us 
from the Americans or, on the contrary, if we had freed 
them from the jungle of Vietnam. 

Very quickly, though, the music that had accorded them a 
kind of freedom found itself in a fire, on the rooftop terrace 
of the house. They had received an order to burn the books, 
songs, films—everything that betrayed the image of those 
men and women with muscular arms holding aloft their 
pitchforks, their hammers and their flag, red with a yellow 
star. Very quickly, they filled the sky with smoke, once 
more. 



vv hat became of those soldiers? Much has changed 
since the brick wall was put up between us and the 
Communists. I went back to Vietnam to work with those 
who had caused the wall to be built, who’d imagined it as a 
tool to break hundreds of thousands of lives, perhaps even 
millions. There had been reversals, of course, since the 
tanks first rolled down the street that ran past our house in 
1975. Since then, I had even learned the Communist 
vocabulary of our former assailants because the Berlin Wall 
fell, because the Iron Curtain was raised, because I am still 
too young to be weighed down by the past. Only, there will 
never be a brick wall in my house. I still don’t share the love 
for brick walls of the people around me. They claim that 
bricks make a room warm. 



I he day I started my job in Hanoi, I walked past a tiny 
room that opened onto the street. Inside, a man and a 
woman were arranging bricks into a low wall that divided 
the room in two. The wall got higher day by day, until it 
reached the ceiling. My secretary told me that it was 
because of two brothers who didn’t want to live under the 
same roof. The mother had been helpless against this 
separation, perhaps because she herself had erected 
similar walls some thirty years earlier between victors and 
vanquished. She died during my three-year stay in Hanoi. 
By way of legacy, to the older child she left the fan without a 
switch, to the younger the switch without the fan. 



I t’s true that the brick wall between those two brothers can’t 
be compared to the one that existed between my family 
and the Communist soldiers, nor do these two wails carry 
the same history as do old Quebecois houses—each wall 
has its own story. It is thanks to that distance that I’ve been 
able to share meals with people who were the right arm 
and the left arm of Ho Chi Minh without seeing the rancour 
hovering, without seeing women on a train holding old 
Guigoz powdered milk cans in their hands as if they were 
jars of magic potion. For the men shut away in re-education 
camps, it was a magic potion, even if the cans held only 
browned meat (thit cha bong): a kilo of roasted pork 
shredded fibre by fibre, dried all night over the embers, 
salted, then salted again with nUac mam obtained after 
two days of waiting in line, two days of hope and despair. 
The women lavished devotion on those filaments of pork, 
even if they weren’t sure of finding their children’s father in 
the camp they were setting off to visit, not knowing if he was 
dead or alive, wounded or sick. In memory of those women, 

I cook that browned meat for my sons now and then, to 
preserve, to repeat, those gestures of love. 



Love, as my son Pascal knows it, is defined by the 
number of hearts drawn on a card or by how many stories 
about dragons are told by flashlight under a down-filled 
comforter. I have to wait a few more years till I can report to 
him that in other times, other places, parents showed their 
love by willingly abandoning their children, like the parents 
of Tom Thumb. Similarly, the mother who made me glide on 
the water with the help of her long stick, surrounded by the 
high mountain peaks of Hoa LU\ wanted to give up her 
daughter, pass her to me. That mother wanted me to 
replace her. She preferred to cry over her child’s absence 
rather than watch her running after tourists to sell them the 
tablecloths she had embroidered. I was a young girl then. In 
the midst of those rocky mountains, I saw only a majestic 
landscape in place of that mother's infinite love. There are 
nights when I run along the long strips of earth next to the 
buffalo to call her back, to take her daughter’s hand in mine. 



I am waiting till Pascal is a few years older before I make 
the connection between the story of the mother from Hoa L 
U and Tom Thumb. In the meantime, I tell him the story of 
the pig that travelled in a coffin to get through the 
surveillance posts between the countryside and the towns. 
He likes to hear me imitate the crying women in the funeral 
procession who threw themselves body and soul onto the 
long wooden box, wailing, while the farmers, dressed all in 
white with bands around their heads, tried to hold them 
back, to console them in front of the inspectors who were 
too accustomed to death. Once they got back to town, 
behind the closed doors of an ever-changing secret 
address, the farmers turned the pig over to the butcher, who 
cut it into pieces. The merchants would then tie those 
around their legs and waists to transport them to the black 
market, to families, to us. 

I tell Pascal these stories to keep alive the memory of a 
slice of history that will never be taught in any school. 



I remember some students in my high school who 
complained about the compulsory history classes. Young 
as we were, we didn’t realize that the course was a 
privilege only countries at peace can afford. Elsewhere, 
people are too preoccupied by their day-to-day survival to 
take the time to write their collective history. If I hadn’t lived 
in the majestic silence of great frozen lakes, in the 
humdrum everyday life of peace, where love is celebrated 
with balloons, confetti, chocolates, I would probably never 
have noticed the old woman who lived near my great¬ 
grandfather’s grave in the Mekong Delta. She was very old, 
so old that the sweat ran down her wrinkles like a brook that 
traces a furrow in the earth. Her back was hunched, so 
hunched that she had to go down staircases backwards so 
as not to lose her balance and fall headfirst. How many 
grains of rice had she planted? How long had she spent 
with her feet in the mud? How many suns had she watched 
set over her rice fields? How many dreams had she set 
aside only to find herself bent in two, thirty years, forty years 
later? 

We often forget about the existence of all those women 
who carried Vietnam on their backs while their husbands 
and sons carried weapons on theirs. We forget them 
because under their cone-shaped hats they did not look up 
at the sky. They waited only for the sun to set on them so 
they could faint instead of falling asleep. Had they taken the 
time to let sleep come, they would have imagined their 
sons blown into a thousand pieces or the bodies of their 
husbands drifting along a river like flotsam. American 
slaves were able to sing about their sorrow in the cotton 
fields. Those women let their sadness grow in the 
chambers of their hearts. They were so weighed down by 
all their grief that they couldn’t pull themselves up, couldn’t 
straighten their hunched backs, bowed under the weight of 



their sorrow. When the men emerged from the jungle and 
started to walk again along the earthen dikes around their 
rice fields, the women continued to bear the weight of 
Vietnam’s inaudible history on their backs. Very often they 
passed away under that weight, in silence. 

One of those women, whom I knew, died when she lost 
her footing in the toilet, perched above a pond full of 
bullheads. Her plastic slippers slid. Anyone watching her at 
that moment would have seen her cone-shaped hat 
disappear behind the four panels that barely hid her 
crouching body, surrounding her without protecting her. She 
died in the family’s septic tank, her head plunging into a 
hole full of excrement between two planks, behind her hut, 
surrounded by smooth-skinned, yellow-fleshed bullheads, 
without scales, without memory. 



/After the old lady died, I would go every Sunday to a lotus 
pond in a suburb of Hanoi where there were always two or 
three women with bent backs and trembling hands, sitting 
in a small round boat, using a stick to move across the 
water and drop tea leaves into open lotus blossoms. They 
would come back the next day to collect them one by one 
before the petals faded, after the captive tea leaves had 
absorbed the scent of the pistils during the night. They told 
me that every one of those tea leaves preserved the soul of 
the short-lived flowers. 



Photos could not preserve the soul of our first Christmas 
trees. Those branches gathered in the woods of suburban 
Montreal, stuck in the rim of a spare tire covered with a 
white sheet, seem bare and lacking in magic, but in reality 
they were much prettier than the eight-foot-tall spruce trees 
we have nowadays. 

My parents often remind my brothers and me that they 
won’t have any money for us to inherit, but I think they’ve 
already passed on to us the wealth of their memories, 
allowing us to grasp the beauty of a flowering wisteria, the 
delicacy of a word, the power of wonder. Even more, 
they’ve given us feet for walking to our dreams, to infinity. 
Which may be enough baggage to continue our journey on 
our own. Otherwise, we would pointlessly clutter our path 
with possessions to transport, to insure, to take care of. 

A Vietnamese saying has it that “Only those with long 
hair are afraid, for no one can pull the hair of those who 
have none.” And so I try as much as possible to acquire 
only those things that don’t extend beyond the limits of my 
body. 



I n any case, since our escape by boat, we learned how to 
travel very light. The gentleman seated next to my uncle in 
the hold had no luggage, not even a small bag with warm 
clothes like us. He had on everything he owned. Swimming 
trunks, shorts, pants, T-shirt, shirt and sweater, and the rest 
was in his orifices: diamonds embedded in his molars, 
gold on his teeth and American dollars stuffed in his anus. 
Once we were at sea, we saw women open their sanitary 
napkins to take out the American dollars impeccably folded 
lengthwise in three. 

As for me, I had an acrylic bracelet, pink like the gums of 
the dental plate it had been made from, filled with 
diamonds. My parents had also put diamonds in the collars 
of my brothers’ shirts. But we had no gold in our teeth 
because it was forbidden to touch the teeth of my mother's 
children. She often told us that teeth and hair are the roots, 
maybe even the fundamental source, of a person. My 
mother wanted our teeth to be perfect. 

That's why even in a refugee camp she was able to find a 
pair of dental pliers to pull out our loose baby teeth. She 
waved each extracted tooth in front of us under the blazing 
Malaysian sun. Those blood-stained teeth were proudly 
displayed against the backdrop of a fine sandy beach and 
a barbed-wire fence. My mother told me it would be 
possible to enlarge my eyes and maybe even to fix my 
ears, which stuck out too much. She couldn’t fix the other 
structural imperfections of my face, though, so at least I 
should have flawless teeth and above all not trade them for 
diamonds. She also knew that if our boat had been 
intercepted by Thai pirates, the gold teeth and those that 
were filled with diamonds would have been pulled out. 



The police were ordered to allow all boats carrying 
Vietnamese of Chinese background to leave “in secret.” 
The Chinese were capitalists, hence anti-Communist, 
because of their ethnic background and their accent. But 
the inspectors were allowed to search them, to strip them of 
everything they owned till the very last minute, to the point of 
humiliation. My family and I became Chinese. We called on 
the genes of my ancestors so that we could leave with the 
tacit consent of the police. 



IVI y maternal great-grandfather was Chinese. He arrived 
in Vietnam by chance at the age of eighteen, married a 
Vietnamese woman and had eight children. Four of them 
chose to be Vietnamese, the other four Chinese. The four 
Vietnamese, including my grandfather, became politicians 
and scientists. The four Chinese prospered in the rice 
business. Even though my grandfather became a prefect, 
he could not persuade his four Chinese siblings to send 
their children to a Vietnamese school. And the Vietnamese 
clan didn’t speak a word of Szechuanese. The family was 
divided in two, as was the country: in the South, pro- 
American, in the North, Communist. 



IVI y uncle Chung, my mother’s big brother, was the bridge 
between the two political camps. In fact, his name means 
together, but I call him Uncle Two because it is a South 
Vietnamese tradition to replace the names of brothers and 
sisters with their birth order, beginning with the number two. 

Uncle Two, the eldest son in the family, was a member of 
parliament and leader of the opposition. He belonged to a 
political party made up of young intellectuals who situated 
themselves in a third camp, daring to stand between the 
two lines of fire. The pro-American government had 
permitted the birth of that party to appease the anger and 
turmoil of the young idealists. My uncle had achieved top 
billing in the mind of the public. On one hand, his political 
program appealed to the members of his team. On the 
other, thanks to his movie-star good looks, to his 
constituents he represented the hope for a semblance of 
democracy. A charismatic, happy-go-lucky young man, he 
had taken down the frontier between the Chinese and 
Vietnamese families. He was someone who could discuss 
with a cabinet minister the impact of a paper shortage on 
freedom of the press while at the same time wrapping his 
arm around the waist of the man's wife and leading her in a 
waltz—even though the Vietnamese didn’t waltz. 



/All through my childhood, I had a secret wish: to be Uncle 
Two’s daughter. Sao Mai was his princess, even if he 
sometimes forgot her existence for days at a time. Sao Mai 
was revered by her parents like a prima donna. Uncle Two 
had many parties at their house. And often, in the middle of 
the evening, he would stop all conversation to seat his 
daughter on the piano bench and introduce the little melody 
she was going to play. For him, during the two short 
minutes of “Au clair de la lune,” nothing existed but the 
chubby-fingered doll tinkling away with the greatest of ease 
before an audience of adults. Every time, I sat under the 
staircase to memorize my uncle’s kiss on Sao Mai’s nose 
while his guests applauded. He gave her only two minutes 
of attention now and then, but it was enough to give my 
cousin an inner strength that I lacked. It didn’t matter if her 
stomach was empty or full, Sao Mai never hesitated to 
boss around her big brothers and me. 



IVI y cousin Sao Mai and I were brought up together. Either 
I was at her house or she was at mine. Sometimes at her 
place there wasn’t even a grain of rice. When her parents 
were away, the maids disappeared too—often with the jar 
of rice. And her parents were often away. One day her big 
brother fed us some stale rice stuck to the bottom of a pan. 
He’d added a little oil and some green onion to make it into 
a meal. Five of us nibbled on that dried-up cake of rice. 
Other days we were buried under mountains of mangoes, 
longans, lychees, Lyon sausage, cream puffs. 

My cousin’s parents would base their choice of what to 
buy on the colour of a fruit or the perfume of a spice or 
simply according to the whim of the moment. The food they 
brought home was always surrounded by a festive aura, a 
sense of decadence and thrill. They didn’t fret over the 
empty rice jar in the kitchen or the poems we were 
supposed to learn by heart. They just wanted us to stuff 
ourselves on mangoes, to bite into fruit and make the juice 
spurt, while spinning around and around like tops to the 
music of the Doors, Sylvie Vartan, Michel Sardou, the 
Beatles or Cat Stevens. 



At my house, meals were always on time, the maids in 
attendance, homework supervised. Unlike Sao Mai's 
parents, my mother gave us only two mangoes to be 
shared by my two brothers and me, despite the dozens 
more that stayed in the basket, if we didn’t agree about the 
portions, she took them back and deprived us of them until 
we’d reached a compromise to divide up the two mangoes 
among the three of us. Which is why I sometimes preferred 
to eat dry rice with my cousins. 



I wanted to be very different from my mother, until the day I 
decided to have my two sons share a bedroom, even 
though there were empty rooms in the house. I wanted them 
to learn to stand by one another the way my brothers and I 
had done. Someone told me that bonds are forged with 
laughter but even more with sharing and the frustrations of 
sharing. It may be that the tears of one led to the tears of 
the other in the middle of the night, because my autistic son 
finally became aware of the presence of Pascal, a big 
brother he'd ignored during his first three or four years. 
Today, he takes palpable pleasure from curling up in 
Pascal’s arms, hiding behind him in front of strangers. It 
may be that thanks to all that interrupted sleep, Pascal 
willingly puts on his left shoe before the right to 
accommodate his brother’s obsessive rigidity. So that his 
brother can begin his day without irritation, without undue 
disruption. 



IVI y mother was probably right, then, not only to force me 
to share with my brothers but also to make us share with 
our cousins. I shared my mother with my cousin Sao Mai 
because she'd taken responsibility for her niece’s 
education. We went to the same school, like twins, sitting 
on the same bench in the same class. Sometimes my 
cousin would replace our teacher when she was away, 
standing on her desk and brandishing a big ruler. She was 
five or six years old like the rest of us, but not in the least 
intimidated by the ruler since, unlike us, she had always 
been placed on a pedestal. I, on the other hand, would wet 
my pants because I didn't dare put my hand up, because I 
didn’t dare walk to the door with all eyes focused on me. My 
cousin struck down anyone who copied my answers. She 
glared at anyone who made fun of my tears. She protected 
me because I was her shadow. 

She dragged her shadow with her everywhere, but 
sometimes she made me run behind her like a dog, just for 
laughs. 



w hen I was with Sao Mai—and I was always with Sao 
Mai—the waiters in what used to be the Cercle sportif de 
Saigon never offered me a lime soda after my tennis 
lessons because they'd already brought one to Sao Mai. 
Inside the big fences of this fashionable club were two very 
distinct categories of people: the elite and the servants, the 
infant kings in their immaculate white clothes and the 
barefoot youngsters who picked up the balls. I belonged to 
neither. I was just Sao Mai’s shadow. I positioned myself 
behind her to eavesdrop on her father’s conversations with 
his tennis partners at tea time. He talked about Proust while 
he ate madeleines, settled in his rattan armchair on the 
terrace of the Cercle sportif. We travelled with him through 
his memories of being a foreign student in Paris. He was 
as enthusiastic in his descriptions of the chairs in the Jardin 
du Luxembourg as he was about the cancan dancers’ legs 
that went on forever. I listened to him from behind his chair, 
holding my breath, like a shadow, so that he wouldn’t stop. 



IVI y mother often got mad at me for being too self- 
effacing. She told me I had to step out of the shadows, work 
on my outstanding features so that the light could be 
reflected there. Every time she tried to take me out of the 
shadows, out of my shadow, I drowned myself in tears to 
the point of exhaustion, until she left me behind on the back 
seat of the car, asleep in the scorching heat of Saigon. I 
spent more time in people's driveways than in their sitting 
rooms. Sometimes I woke up to the sound of children 
innocently whirling around the car, sticking out their tongues 
and snickering. My mother thought that defending myself 
would strengthen my muscles. In time she was able to turn 
me into a woman, but never into a princess. 



Today, my mother regrets not bringing me up to be a 
princess, because she’s not my queen in the way that Uncle 
Two was a king to his children. He maintained the royal 
status until his death, even though he never signed a note 
for the teacher, read a report card or washed his children’s 
dirty hands. Sometimes my cousin and I were lucky enough 
to travel on my uncle’s Vespa, my cousin standing in front, 
me sitting behind. Sao Mai and I waited for him many times 
under the tamarind tree in front of our primary school, until 
the janitor padlocked the doors behind us. Even the men 
who sold pickled mangoes, guavas with spicy salt and 
chilled jicama had already left the sidewalk in front of the 
school when Mai and I, dazzled by the setting sun, would 
see him coming in the distance, hair windblown, wearing a 
fiery smile, incomparable. 

He would take us in his arms and all at once not only 
were we transformed into princesses, but we were in his 
eyes also the prettiest, the most highly prized. That moment 
of euphoria only lasted the length of the journey: very soon 
he would have a woman in his arms, rarely the same one, 
who became in turn his princess of the moment. We would 
wait for him in the sitting room until the new princess 
stopped being a princess. Each of those women had the 
satisfaction of thinking she was the chosen one, even if she 
was well aware that she was only one among many. 



My parents were very critical of Uncle Two’s casual 
attitude. That was why, without Uncle Two ever asking me, I 
never talked about the long waits outside school or the 
evenings in the sitting rooms of unknown women. If I’d 
exposed him, he wouldn’t have been allowed to pick us up. 
I would have lost the chance of being a princess, of seeing 
my kiss transformed into a flower on his cheek. Thirty years 
later, my mother would like me to place upon her cheeks 
those same kisses turned into flowers. Maybe I did become 
a princess in her eyes. But I’m just her daughter, only her 
daughter. 



F rom Quebec, my mother sent money to Uncle Two’s 
sons so they could get away by boat as we had done. After 
the first wave of boat people in the late 1970s, it no longer 
made sense to send girls to sea because encounters with 
pirates had become inevitable, a ritual of the journey, an 
inescapable injury. So only the two older boys set out on the 
fugitives’ bus. They were arrested during the journey. Their 
father, my uncle, my king, had denounced them ... Was it 
from fear they’d be lost at sea or from fear of reprisals 
against him, their father? When I think back on it, I remind 
myself that he couldn’t tell them he’d never been their father, 
only their king. He must have feared being pointed to 
publicly as an anti-Communist. He was certainly afraid of 
appearing in public, where he’d have been at home a short 
time before, if I’d had a voice then, I’d have told him not to 
denounce them. I’d have told him that I never informed on 
him for being late or made mention of his escapades. 



Jeanne, our good fairy with a T-shirt and pink tights and a 
flower in her hair, liberated my voice without using words. 
She spoke to us—her nine Vietnamese students at the 
Sainte-Famille elementary school—with music, with her 
fingers, her shoulders. She showed us how to occupy the 
space around us by freeing our arms, by raising our chins, 
by breathing deeply. She fluttered around us like a fairy, her 
eyes stroking us one by one. Her neck stretched out to form 
a continuous line with her shoulder, her arm, all the way to 
her fingertips. Her legs made great circular movements as 
if to sweep the walls, to stir the air. It was thanks to Jeanne 
that I learned how to free my voice from the folds of my 
body so it could reach my lips. 



I used my voice to read to Uncle Two just before he died, 
in the very heart of Saigon, some of the erotic passages 
from Houellebecq’s Particules elementaires. I no longer 
wanted to be his princess, I’d become his angel, reminding 
him how he had dipped my fingers into the whipped cream 
on cafe viennois while singing Besame, besame mucho ... 

His body, even once it was cold, even once it was rigid, 
was surrounded not only by his children, by his wives—the 
old one and the new—by his brothers and sisters, but also 
by people who didn’t know him. They came in the 
thousands to mourn his death. Some were losing their 
lover, some their sports reporter, others their former 
member of parliament, their writer, their painter, their hand 
at poker. 

Among all these people was a gentleman who was 
obviously destitute. He wore a shirt with a yellowed collar 
and wrinkled black pants held up by an old belt. He stood in 
the distance, in the shade of a royal poinciana laden with 
flame-red blossoms, next to a mud-stained Chinese 
bicycle. He had waited for hours to follow the funeral 
procession to the graveyard, which was in the outskirts of 
the city, enclosed within a Buddhist temple. There again he 
stood off to one side, silent and unmoving. One of my aunts 
went over and asked him why he’d pedalled all that 
distance. Did he know my uncle? He replied that he didn’t 
know him but that it was thanks to my uncle’s words that he 
was alive, that he got up every morning. He had lost his 
idol. I hadn’t. I’d lost neither my idol nor my king, only a 
friend who told me his stories about women, about politics, 
painting, books; and mostly about frivolity, because he 
hadn’t grown old before he died. He had stopped time by 
continuing to enjoy himself, to live until the end with the 
lightness of a young man. 



So perhaps my mother doesn’t need to be my queen; 
simply being my mother is already a lot, even if the rare 
kisses I place on her cheeks aren’t so majestic. 



My mother envied my uncle’s irresponsibility, or rather his 
capacity for it. In spite of herself, she was also jealous of 
her little brother and sisters' status as king and queens. 
Like their older brother, her sisters are idolized by their 
children for a variety of reasons, one because she’s the 
most beautiful, another the most talented, yet another the 
smartest... In my cousins' eyes, their mother is always the 
best. For all of us, including my aunts and cousins, my 
mother was only frightening. When she was a young 
woman, she’d represented the highest authority figure. 
Zealously she imposed her role of older sister on her little 
sisters, because she wanted to break away from her big 
brother, who gobbled up every presence around him. 

So my mother had taken on the duties of man of the 
house, Minister of Education, Mother Superior, chief 
executive of the clan. She made decisions, handed out 
punishments, put right delinquents, silenced 
protesters ... My grandfather, as chairman of the board, 
didn’t look after everyday tasks. My grandmother had her 
hands full raising her young children and recovering from 
repeated miscarriages. According to my mother, Uncle 
Two was the embodiment of selfishness and egocentricity. 
And so she became established as manager of the 
supreme authority. I remember one day when my 
grandmother didn’t even dare ask her to unlock the 
bathroom door and release her little brother and sisters 
who were being punished for going out with Uncle Two 
without my mother’s permission. As she was only a young 
girl, she administered her authority—naively—with an iron 
hand. Her revenge against her older brother’s nonchalance 
and the way the children revered him was poorly planned, 
because the youngsters went on playing in the bathroom, 
and did it without her. All the fun of childhood slipped 
between her fingers while, in the name of propriety she 



was forbidding her sisters to dance. 



Over the past ten years, however, my mother has 
discovered the joys of dancing. She let her friends 
persuade her that the tango, the cha-cha and the paso 
doble could replace physical exercise, that there was 
nothing sensual or seductive or intoxicating about them. Yet 
ever since she's been going to her weekly dancing class, 
she says now and then that she wishes she’d segued from 
her days on the election campaign to the parties where her 
brother, my father and dozens of other young candidates 
amused themselves around a table. Also, today she seeks 
my father’s hand at a movie and his kiss on her cheek when 
posing for photos. 

My mother started to live, to let herself be carried away, 
to reinvent herself at the age of fifty-five. 



Ms for my father, he didn’t have to reinvent himself. He is 
someone who lives in the moment, with no affection for the 
past. He savours every instant of the present as if it were 
still the best and only time, with no comparisons, no 
measurements. That’s why he always inspired the greatest, 
most wonderful happiness, whether holding a mop on the 
steps of a hotel or sitting in a limousine en route to a 
strategic meeting with his minister. 

From my father I inherited the permanent feeling of 
satisfaction. Where did he find it, though? Was it because 
he was the tenth child? Or because of the long wait for his 
kidnapped father’s release? Before the French left 
Vietnam, before the Americans arrived, the Vietnamese 
countryside was terrorized by different factions of thugs 
introduced there by the French authorities to divide the 
country. It was common practice to sell wealthy families a 
nail to pay the ransom of someone who’d been kidnapped. 
If the nail wasn’t bought, it was hammered into an earlobe 
—or elsewhere—on the kidnap victim. My grandfather’s 
nail was bought by his family. When he came home, he sent 
his children to urban centres to live with cousins, thereby 
ensuring their safety and their access to education. Very 
early, my father learned how to live far away from his 
parents, to leave places, to love the present tense, to let go 
of any attachment to the past. 



That is why he’s never been curious to know his real date 
of birth. The official date recorded on his birth certificate at 
the city hall corresponds to a day with no bombardment, no 
exploding mines, no hostages taken. Parents may have 
thought that their children’s existence began on the first day 
that life went back to normal, not at the moment of their first 
breath. 

Similarly, he has never felt the need to see Vietnam 
again after his departure. Today, people from his birthplace 
visit him on behalf of property developers, suggesting he 
demand the deed to his father's house. They say that ten 
families live there now. The last time we saw it, it was being 
used as a barracks by Communist soldiers recycled as 
firemen. Those soldiers started their families in the big 
house. Do they know that they live in a building put up by a 
French engineer, a graduate of the prestigious National 
School of Bridges and Roads? Do they know that the 
house is a thank-you from my great-uncle to my 
grandfather, his older brother, who sent him to France for 
his education? Do they know that ten children were brought 
up there but now live in ten different cities because they 
were ejected from their family circle? No, they know 
nothing. They can’t know: they were born after the French 
withdrawal and before that part of the history of Vietnam 
could be taught to them. They’d probably never seen an 
American face up close, without camouflage, until the first 
tourists came to their town some years ago. They only know 
that if my father takes back the house and sells it to a 
developer, they will receive a small fortune, a reward for 
confining my paternal grandparents to the tiniest room in 
their own house during the final months of their lives. 

Some nights the firefighter-soldiers, drunk and lost, 
would fire through the curtains to silence my grandfather. 
But he’d stopped speaking after his stroke, which had 



happened before I was even born. I never heard his voice. 



My paternal grandfather I never saw in any position but 
horizontal, stretched out on an enormous ebony daybed 
that stood on carved feet. He was always dressed in 
immaculately white pyjamas without a crease. My father's 
Sister Five, who had turned her back on marriage to look 
after her parents, kept watch obsessively over my 
grandfather’s cleanliness. She would not tolerate the 
slightest spot or any sign of inattention. At mealtimes, a 
servant would sit behind him to keep his back straight, 
while my aunt fed him rice, a mouthful at a time. His 
favourite meal was rice with roast pork. The slices of pork 
were cut so finely they seemed to be minced. But they 
weren’t to be chopped, only cut into small pieces two 
millimetres square. She mixed them with steaming rice 
served in a blue and white bowl with a silver ring around its 
rim to prevent chipping. If the bowls were held up to the sun, 
one could see translucent areas in the embossed parts. 
Their quality was confirmed by the glimmers that exposed 
the shades of blue in the patterns. The bowls nestled gently 
in my aunt’s hands at every meal, every day, for many 
years. She would hold one, delicate and warm, in her 
fingers and add a few drops of soy sauce and a small 
piece of Bretel butter that was imported from France in a 
red tin with gold lettering. I was also entitled to this rice now 
and then when we visited. 

Today, my father prepares this dish for my sons when 
he’s given some Bretel butter by friends coming home from 
France. My brothers make affectionate fun of my father 
because he uses the most outrageous superlatives to 
describe the tinned butter. I agree with him, though. I love 
the scent of that butter because it reminds me of my 
paternal grandfather, the one who died with the soldier- 
firemen. 

I also like to use those blue bowls with the silver rims to 



serve ice cream to my sons. They are the only objects that I 
wanted from my aunt, the one who was driven out of her 
house after the death of my paternal grandparents. She 
became a Buddhist, living in a hut behind a plantation of 
palm trees, stripped of all material goods but a wooden 
bed without a mattress, a sandalwood fan and her father's 
four blue bowls. She hesitated briefly before complying with 
my request: the bowls symbolized her last attachment to 
any earthly concerns. She died shortly after my visit to her 
hut, surrounded by monks from a nearby temple. 



I went back to Vietnam to work for three years, but I never 
visited my father’s birthplace some two hundred and fifty 
kilometres from Saigon. When I was a child, I would vomit 
the whole way whenever I made that twelve-hour journey, 
even though my mother put pillows on the floor of the car to 
keep me still. The roads were riddled with deep fissures. 
Communist rebels planted mines by night and pro- 
American soldiers cleared them away by day. Still, 
sometimes a mine exploded. Then we had to wait hours for 
the soldiers to fill in the holes and gather up the human 
remains. One day a woman was torn to pieces, surrounded 
by yellow squash blossoms, scattered, fragmented. She 
must have been on her way to the market to sell her 
vegetables. Maybe they also found the body of her baby by 
the roadside. Or not. Maybe her husband had died in the 
jungle. Maybe she was the woman who had lost her lover 
outside the house of my maternal grandfather, the prefect. 



One day when we were deep inside the darkness of a 
cube van on our way to pick strawberries or beans, my 
mother told me about a woman, a day labourer, who would 
wait for her employer across from my maternal 
grandfather’s place every morning. And every morning my 
grandfather’s gardener brought her a portion of sticky rice 
wrapped in a banana leaf. Every morning, standing in the 
truck that was taking her to the rubber trees, she watched 
the gardener move away in the middle of the bougainvillea 
garden. One morning she didn’t see him cross the dirt road 
to bring her breakfast. Then another morning ... and 
another. One night she gave my mother a sheet of paper 
darkened with question marks, nothing else. My mother 
never saw her again in the truck jam-packed with workers. 
That young girl never went back to the plantations or to the 
bougainvillea garden. She disappeared not knowing that 
the gardener had asked his parents in vain for permission 
to marry her. No one told her that my grandfather had 
accepted the request of the gardener’s parents to send him 
to another town. No one told her that the gardener, her own 
love, had been forced to go away, unable to leave her a 
letter because she was illiterate, because she was a young 
woman travelling in the company of men, because her skin 
had been burned too dark by the sun. 



IVIadame Girard had the same burned skin even though 
she didn't work in the strawberry fields or the plantations. 
Madame Girard had hired my mother to clean her house, 
not knowing that my mother had never held a broom in her 
hands before her first day on the job. Madame Girard was 
a platinum blonde like Marilyn Monroe, with blue, blue eyes, 
and Monsieur Girard, a tall, brown-haired man, was the 
proud owner of a sparkling antique car. They often invited 
us to their white house with its perfectly mown lawn and 
flowers lining the entrance and a carpet in every room. They 
were the personification of our American dream. 

Their daughter invited me to her roller skating 
competitions. She passed on to me her dresses that had 
become too small, one of them a blue cotton sundress with 
tiny white flowers and two straps that tied on the shoulder. I 
wore it during the summer, but also in winter over a white 
turtleneck. During our first winters, we didn’t know that every 
garment had its season, that we mustn’t simply wear all the 
clothes we owned. When we were cold, without 
discriminating, without knowing the different categories, we 
would put one garment over another, layer by layer, like the 
homeless. 



IVI y father tracked down Monsieur Girard thirty years later. 
He no longer lived in the same house, his wife had left him 
and his daughter was on sabbatical, in search of a 
purpose, a life. When my father brought me this news, I 
almost felt guilty. I wondered if we hadn't unintentionally 
stolen Monsieur Girard’s American dream from having 
wanted it too badly. 



I also got back together with my first friend, Johanne, thirty 
years later. She didn't recognize me, neither on the phone 
nor in person, because she had known me as deaf and 
mute. We’d never spoken. She didn’t really remember that 
she’d wanted to become a surgeon, even though I had 
always told my high school guidance counsellors that I was 
interested in surgery, like Johanne. 

The guidance counsellors would call me into their offices 
every year because there was a glaring gap between my 
grades and the results of my IQ tests, which bordered on 
deficient. How could I not find the intruder in the series 
“syringe, scalpel, skull, drill” when I could recite by heart a 
passage about Jacques Cartier? I only mastered what had 
been specifically taught to me, passed on to me, offered to 
me. Which is why I understood the word surgeon but not 
darling or tanning salon or horseback riding. I could sing 
the national anthem but not “The Chicken Dance” or the 
birthday song. I accumulated knowledge at random, like my 
son Henri, who can pronounce poire but not maman, 
because the course of our learning was atypical, full of 
detours and snags, with no gradation, no logic. I shaped my 
dreams in the same way, through meetings, friends, other 
people. 



For many immigrants, the American dream has come 
true. Some thirty years ago, in Washington, Quebec City, 
Boston, Rimouski or Toronto, we would pass through whole 
neighbourhoods strewn with rose gardens, hundred-year- 
old trees, stone houses, but the address we were looking 
for never appeared on one of those doors. Nowadays, my 
aunt Six and her husband, Step-uncle Six, live in one of 
those houses. They travel first class and have to stick a 
sign on the back of their seat so the hostesses will stop 
offering them chocolates and champagne. Thirty years ago, 
in our Malaysian refugee camp, the same Step-uncle Six 
crawled more slowly than his eight-month-old daughter 
because he was suffering from malnutrition. And the same 
Aunt Six used the one needle she had to sew clothes so 
she could buy milk for her daughter. Thirty years ago, we 
lived in the dark with them, with no electricity, no running 
water, no privacy. Today, we complain that their house is 
too big and our extended family too small to experience the 
same intensity of the festivities—which lasted until dawn— 
when we used to get together at my parents’ place during 
our first years in North America. 

There were twenty-five of us, sometimes thirty, arriving in 
Montreal from Fanwood, Montpelier, Springfield, Guelph, 
coming together in a small, three-bedroom apartment for 
the entire Christmas holiday. Anyone who wanted to sleep 
alone had to move into the bathtub. Inevitably, 
conversations, laughter and quarrels went on all night. 
Every gift we offered was a genuine gift, because it 
represented a sacrifice and it answered a need, a desire 
or a dream. We were well acquainted with the dreams of 
our nearest and dearest: those with whom we were packed 
in tightly for nights at a time. Back then, we all had the same 
dreams. For a long time, we were obliged to have the 
same one, the American dream. 




vv hen I turned fifteen, my aunt Six, who at the time was 
working in a chicken processing plant, gave me a square 
aluminum tin of tea that had images of Chinese spirits, 
cherry trees and clouds in red, gold and black. Aunt Six had 
written on each of ten pieces of paper, folded in two and 
placed in the tea, the name of a profession, an occupation, 
a dream that she had for me: journalist, cabinetmaker, 
diplomat, lawyer, fashion designer, flight attendant, writer, 
humanitarian worker, director, politician. It was thanks to 
that gift that I learned there were other professions than 
medicine, that I was allowed to dream my own dreams. 



Once it’s achieved, though, the American dream never 
leaves us, like a graft or an excrescence. The first time I 
carried a briefcase, the first time I went to a restaurant 
school for young adults in Hanoi, wearing heels and a 
straight skirt, the waiter for my table didn’t understand why I 
was speaking Vietnamese with him. At first I thought that he 
couldn’t understand my southern accent. At the end of the 
meal, though, he explained ingenuously that I was too fat to 
be Vietnamese. 

I translated that remark to my employers, who laugh 
about it to this day. I understood later that he was talking not 
about my forty-five kilos but about the American dream that 
had made me more substantial, heavier, weightier. That 
American dream had given confidence to my voice, 
determination to my actions, precision to my desires, 
speed to my gait and strength to my gaze. That American 
dream made me believe I could have everything, that I 
could go around in a chauffeur-driven car while estimating 
the weight of the squash being carried on a rusty bicycle by 
a woman with eyes blurred by sweat; that I could dance to 
the same rhythm as the girls who swayed their hips at the 
bar to dazzle men whose thick billfolds were swollen with 
American dollars; that I could live in the grand villa of an 
expatriate and accompany barefoot children to their school 
that sat right on the sidewalk, where two streets 
intersected. 

But the young waiter reminded me that I couldn’t have 
everything, that I no longer had the right to declare I 
was Vietnamese because I no longer had their fragility, 
their uncertainty, their fears. And he was right to 
remind me. 



Around that time, my employer, who was based in 
Quebec, clipped an article from a Montreal paper 
reiterating that the “Quebecois nation” was Caucasian, that 
my slanting eyes automatically placed me in a separate 
category, even though Quebec had given me my American 
dream, even though it had cradled me for thirty years. 
Whom to like, then? No one or everyone? I chose to like the 
gentleman from Saint-Felicien who asked me in English to 
grant him a dance. “Follow the guy,” he told me. I also like 
the rickshaw driver in Da Nang who asked me how much I 
was paid as an escort for my “white” husband. And I often 
think about the woman who sold cakes of tofu for five cents 
each, sitting on the ground in a hidden corner of the market 
in Flanoi, who told her neighbours that I was from Japan, 
that I was making good progress with my Vietnamese. 

She was right. I had to relearn my mother tongue, which 
I’d given up too soon. In any case, I hadn’t really mastered it 
completely because the country was divided in two when I 
was born. I come from the South, so I had never heard 
people from the North until I went back to Vietnam. 
Similarly, people in the North had never heard people from 
the South before reunification. Like Canada, Vietnam had 
its own two solitudes. The language of North Vietnam had 
developed in accordance with its political, social and 
economic situation at the time, with words to describe how 
to shoot down an airplane with a machine gun set up on a 
roof, how to use monosodium glutamate to make blood clot 
more quickly, how to spot the shelters when the sirens go 
off. Meanwhile, the language of the South had created 
words to express the sensation of Coca-Cola bubbles on 
the tongue, terms for naming spies, rebels, Communist 
sympathizers on the streets of the South, names to 
designate the children born from wild nights with GIs. 



11 was thanks to the GIs that my step-uncle Six was able to 
buy his own passage and those of his wife, my aunt Six, 
and his very small daughter on the same boat as us. The 
parents of that step-uncle became very rich thanks to ice. 
American soldiers would buy entire blocks one metre long 
and twenty centimetres wide and thick to put under their 
beds. They needed to cool down after weeks of sweating 
with fear in the Vietnamese jungle. They needed human 
comfort, but without feeling the heat of their own bodies or 
of women rented by the hour. They needed the cool 
breezes of Vermont or Montana. They needed that 
coolness so they could stop suspecting, for a moment, that 
a grenade was hidden in the hands of every child who 
touched the hair on their arms. They needed that cold so as 
not to give way to all those full lips murmuring false words of 
love into their ears, to drive away the cries of their 
comrades with mutilated bodies. They needed to be cold to 
leave the women who were carrying their children without 
ever returning to see them again, without ever revealing 
their last names. 



IVI ost of those children of GIs became orphans, 
homeless, ostracized not only because of their mothers’ 
profession but also because of their fathers’. They were the 
hidden side of the war. Thirty years after the last Gl had left, 
the United States went back to Vietnam in place of their 
soldiers to rehabilitate those damaged children. The 
government granted them a whole new identity to erase the 
one that had been tarnished. A number of those children 
now had, for the first time, an address, a residence, a full 
life. Some, though, were unable to adapt to such wealth. 

Once, when I was working as an interpreter for the New 
York police, I met one of those children, now adult. She was 
illiterate, wandering the streets of the Bronx. She'd come to 
Manhattan on a bus from a place she couldn’t name. She 
hoped that the bus would take her back to her bed made of 
cardboard boxes, just outside the post office in Saigon. 
She declared insistently that she was Vietnamese. Even 
though she had cafe au lait skin, thick wavy hair, African 
blood, deep scars, she was Vietnamese, only Vietnamese, 
she repeated incessantly. She begged me to translate for 
the policeman her desire to go back to her own jungle. But 
the policeman could only release her into the jungle of the 
Bronx. Had I been able to, I would have asked her to curl up 
against me. Had I been able to, I’d have erased every trace 
of dirty hands from her body. I was the same age as her. 
No, I don’t have the right to say that I was the same age as 
her: her age was measured in the number of stars she saw 
when she was being beaten and not in years, months, days. 



Mi times, the memory of that girl still haunts me. I wonder 
what her chances of survival were in the city of New York. 
Or if she is still there. Whether the policeman thinks about 
her as often as I do. Perhaps my step-uncle Six, who has a 
doctorate in statistics from Princeton, could calculate the 
number of risks and obstacles she has faced. 

I often ask that step-uncle to do the calculation, even if he 
has never calculated the miles travelled every morning for 
one whole summer to take me to my English lessons, or the 
quantity of books he bought me or the number of dreams 
he and his wife have created for me. I allow myself to ask 
him many things. But I’ve never dared to ask if it was 
possible for him to calculate the probability of survival for 
Monsieur An. 



Monsieur An arrived in Granby on the same bus as our 
family. In winter and summer alike, Monsieur An stood with 
his back against the wall, and one foot on the low railing, 
holding a cigarette. He was our next-door neighbour. For a 
long time, I thought he was mute. If I ran into him today, I 
would say that he’s autistic. One day his foot slipped on the 
morning dew. And bang, he was spread out on his back. 
BANG! He cried out “BANG!” several times, then burst out 
laughing. I knelt down to help him get up. He leaned against 
me, holding my arms, but didn’t get up. He was crying. He 
kept crying and crying, then stopped suddenly, and turned 
my face towards the sky. He asked me what colour I saw. 
Blue. Then he raised his thumb and pointed his index finger 
towards my temple, asking me again if the sky was still 
blue. 



Before Monsieur An's job was to clean the floor of the 
rubber-boot plant in Granby, he’d been a judge, a 
professor, graduate of an American university, father and 
prisoner. Between the heat in his Saigon courtroom and the 
smell of rubber, for two years he had been accused of 
being a judge, of sentencing Communist countrymen. In the 
re-education camp, it was his turn to be judged, to position 
himself in the ranks every morning with hundreds of others 
who’d also been on the losing side in the war. 

That camp surrounded by jungle was a retreat for the 
prisoners to assess and formulate self-criticisms, 
depending on their status—counter-revolutionary; traitor to 
the nation; collaborator with the Americans—and to 
meditate on their redemption while felling trees, planting 
corn, clearing fields of mines. 

The days followed one another like the links of a chain— 
the first fastened around their necks, the last to the centre of 
the earth. One morning, Monsieur An felt his chain getting 
shorter when the soldiers took him out of the ranks and 
made him kneel in the mud before the fleeting, frightened, 
empty gazes of his former colleagues, their bodies barely 
covered with rags and skin. He told me that when the hot 
metal of the pistol touched his temple, in one last act of 
rebellion he raised his head to look at the sky. For the first 
time, he could see shades of blue, all equally intense. 
Together, they dazzled him almost to the point of blindness. 
At the same time, he could hear the click of the trigger drop 
into silence. No sound, no explosion, no blood, only sweat. 
That night, the shades of blue that he'd seen earlier filed 
past his eyes like a film being screened over and over. 

He survived. The sky had cut his chain, had saved him, 
freed him, while some of the others were suffocated to 
death, dried up in containers without having a chance to 
count the blues of the sky. Every day, then, he set himself 



the task of listing those colours—for the others. 



Monsieur An taught me about nuance. Monsieur Minh 
gave me the urge to write. I met Monsieur Minh on a red 
vinyl bench in a Chinese restaurant on Cote-des-Neiges 
where my father worked as a delivery man. I did my 
homework while I waited for the end of his shift. Monsieur 
Minh made notes for him about one-way streets, private 
addresses, clients to avoid. He was preparing to become a 
delivery man just as seriously, just as enthusiastically, as 
he’d studied French literature at the Sorbonne. He was 
saved not by the sky but by writing. He had written a 
number of books during his time in the re-education camp 
—always on the one piece of paper he possessed, page 
by page, chapter by chapter, an unending story. Without 
writing, he wouldn't have heard the snow melting or leaves 
growing or clouds sailing through the sky. Nor would he 
have seen the dead end of a thought, the remains of a star 
or the texture of a comma. Nights when he was in his 
kitchen painting wooden ducks, Canada geese, loons, 
mallards, following the colour scheme provided by his other 
employer, he would recite for me the words in his personal 
dictionary: nummular, moan, quadraphony, in extremis, 
sacculina, logarithmic, hemorrhage—like a mantra, like a 
march towards the void. 



Each of us had been saved in a different way during 
Vietnam’s peacetime or postwar period. My own family 
was saved by Anh Phi. 

It was Anh Phi, teenage son of a friend of my parents, 
who found the pack of gold taels my father had flung from 
our third-floor balcony during the night. The day before, my 
parents had told me to pull on the bit of rope that ran 
alongside the corridor if one of the ten soldiers living in our 
house should come up to our floor. My parents had spent 
hours in the bathroom clearing out the thin gold sheets and 
the diamonds hidden under the tiny pink and black tiles. 
Then they wrapped them carefully in several layers of brown 
paper bags before throwing them into the dark. The 
package had landed as expected in the debris of the 
demolished house that once belonged to the former 
neighbour across the way. 

At that time, children had to plant trees as a sign of 
gratitude towards our spiritual leader, Ho Chi Minh, and 
they also had to retrieve undamaged bricks from demolition 
sites. My search through the debris for the package of gold 
therefore roused no suspicions. But I had to be careful, 
because one of the soldiers at our house was assigned to 
keep an eye on where we went and whom we were with. 
Knowing that I was being watched, I walked across the site 
too quickly and couldn’t find the package, not even after a 
second try. My parents asked Anh Phi to take a look. After 
his search, he took off with a bag full of bricks. 

The package of gold taels was returned to my parents a 
few days later. Subsequently, they gave it to the organizer 
of our sea-bound escape. All the taels were there. During 
this chaotic peacetime, it was the norm for hunger to 
replace reason, for uncertainty to usurp morality, but the 
reverse was rarely true. Anh Phi and his mother were the 
exception. They became our heroes. 




I o tell the truth, Anh Phi had been my hero long before he 
handed over the two and a half kilos of gold to my parents, 
because whenever I visited him, he would sit with me on his 
doorstep and make a candy appear from behind my ear 
instead of urging me to play with the other children. 

My first journey on my own, without my parents, was to 
Texas, to see Anh Phi again and this time give him a 
candy. We were sitting side by side on the floor against his 
single bed in the university residence when I asked him why 
he’d given the package of gold back to my parents, when 
his widowed mother had to mix their rice with barley, 
sorghum and corn to feed him and his three brothers. Why 
that heroically honest deed? He told me, laughing and 
hitting me repeatedly with his pillow, that he wanted my 
parents to be able to pay for our passage because 
otherwise he wouldn’t have a little girl to tease. He was still 
a hero, a true hero, because he couldn’t help being one, 
because he is a hero without knowing it, without wanting to 
be. 



I wanted to be a heroine to the young girl selling grilled 
pork outside the walls of the Buddhist temple across from 
the office in Hanoi. She spoke very little, was always 
working, absorbed in the slices of pork she was cutting 
then putting into the dozens of baguettes she'd already split 
down three-quarters of their length. It was hard to see her 
face once the coal had been kindled in the metal box 
blackened by grease accumulated over the years, because 
a cloud of smoke and ash enveloped her, suffocated her, 
made her eyes water. Her brother-in-law served the 
customers and washed the dishes in two pots of water set 
on the very edge of the sidewalk, beside an open sewer. 
She must have been fifteen or sixteen, and was stunningly 
beautiful despite her misty eyes and her cheeks smeared 
with ashes and soot. 

One day her hair caught fire, burning part of her polyester 
shirt before her brother-in-law had time to pour the dirty 
dishwater over her head. She was covered with lettuce, 
slices of green papaya, hot peppers, fish sauce. I went to 
see her before lunch the next day to offer her work cleaning 
the office and to suggest that she sign up for a cooking 
class and English lessons. I was sure I would be granting 
her fondest dream. But she refused, refused all of it, by 
simply shaking her head. I left Hanoi, abandoning her to her 
bit of sidewalk, unable to make her turn her gaze towards a 
horizon without smoke, unable to become a hero like Anh 
Phi, like many people who have been identified, named 
and designated heroes in Vietnam. 



Peace born from the mouths of cannon inevitably gives 
birth to hundreds, to thousands of anecdotes about the 
brave, about heroes. During the first years after the 
Communist victory, there weren’t enough pages in the 
history books to fit in all the heroes, so they were lodged in 
math books: if Comrade Cong downed two airplanes a 
day, how many did he shoot down in a week? 

We no longer learned to count with bananas and 
pineapples. The classroom was turned into a huge game of 
Risk, with calculations of dead, wounded or imprisoned 
soldiers and patriotic victories, grandiose and colourful. 
The colours, though, were illustrated only with words. 
Pictures were monochromatic, like the people, perhaps to 
stop us from forgetting the dark side of reality. We all had to 
wear black pants and dark shirts. If not, soldiers in khaki 
uniforms would take us to the station for a session of 
interrogation and re-education. They also arrested girls 
who used blue eyeshadow. They thought these girls had 
black eyes, that they were victims of capitalist violence. 
Perhaps for that reason they removed the sky blue from the 
first Vietnamese Communist flag. 



w hen my husband wore his red T-shirt with a yellow star 
in the streets of Montreal, the Vietnamese harassed him. 
Later my parents had him take it off and replaced it with an 
ill-fitting shirt of my father’s. Even though I could never have 
worn such a thing myself, I hadn't told my husband not to 
buy it because I myself had once proudly tied a red scarf 
around my neck. I had made that symbol of Communist 
youth part of my wardrobe. I even envied friends who had 
the words Chau ngoan Bac H6 embroidered in yellow on 
the triangle that jutted out from the neckline. They were the 
“beloved children of the party,” a status I could never attain 
because of my family background, even though I stood first 
in my class or had planted the most trees while thinking 
about the father of our peace. Every classroom, every 
office, every house was supposed to have at least one 
photo of Ho Chi Minh on the walls. His photo even 
displaced those of ancestors that no one had ever dared to 
touch before because they were sacred. The ancestors— 
though they may have been gamblers, incompetent or 
violent—all became respectable and untouchable once 
they were dead, once they'd been placed on the altar with 
incense, fruits, tea. The altars had to be high enough so that 
the ancestors looked down on us. All descendants had to 
carry their ancestors not in their hearts but above their 
heads. 



Just recently in Montreal, I saw a Vietnamese 
grandmother ask her one-year-old grandson: “Thu’o’ng Ba 
de dau?” I can’t translate that phrase, which contains just 
four words, two of them verbs, to love and to carry. Literally, 
it means, “Love grandmother carry where?” The child 
touched his head with his hand. I had completely forgotten 
that gesture, which I’d performed a thousand times when I 
was small. I’d forgotten that love comes from the head and 
not the heart. Of the entire body, only the head matters. 
Merely touching the head of a Vietnamese person insults 
not just him but his entire family tree. That is why a shy 
Vietnamese eight-year-old turned into a raging tiger when 
his Quebecois teammate rubbed the top of his head to 
congratulate him for catching his first football. 

If a mark of affection can sometimes be taken for an 
insult, perhaps the gesture of love is not universal: it too 
must be translated from one language to another, must be 
learned. In the case of Vietnamese, it is possible to 
classify, to quantify the meaning of love through specific 
words: to love by taste ( thich ); to love without being in love 
(thu'o’ng)\ to love passionately (yeu); to love ecstatically 
(me); to love blindly (mu quang)\ to love gratefully (tlnh 
nghTa). It’s impossible quite simply to love, to love without 
one’s head. 

I am lucky that I’ve learned to savour the pleasure of 
resting my head in a hand, and my parents are lucky to be 
able to capture the love of my children when the little ones 
drop kisses into their hair, spontaneously, with no formality, 
during a session of tickling in bed. I myself have touched 
my father’s head only once. He had ordered me to lean on 
it as I stepped over the handrail of the boat. 



We didn’t know where we were. We had landed on the 
first terra firma. As we were making our way to the beach, 
an Asian man in light blue boxer shorts came running 
towards our boat. He told us in Vietnamese to disembark 
and destroy the boat. Was he Vietnamese? Were we back 
at our starting point after four days at sea? I don’t think 
anyone asked, because we all jumped into the water as if 
we were an army being deployed. The man disappeared 
into this chaos, for good. I don’t know why I’ve held on to 
such a clear image of that man running in the water, arms 
waving, fist punching the air with an urgent cry that the wind 
didn’t carry to me. I remember that image with as much 
precision and clarity as the one of Bo Derek running out of 
the water in her flesh-coloured bathing suit. Yet I saw that 
man only once, for a fraction of a second, unlike the poster 
of Bo Derek, which I would come upon every day for 
months. 

Everyone on deck saw him. But no one dared confirm it 
with certainty. He may have been one of the dead who had 
seen the local authorities drive the boats back to the sea. 
Or a ghost whose duty it was to save us, so he could gain 
his own access to paradise. He may have been a 
schizophrenic Malaysian. Or maybe a tourist from a Club 
Med who wanted to break the monotony of his vacation. 



Most likely he was a tourist, because we landed on a 
beach that was protected because of its turtle population, 
and it was close to the site of a Club Med. In fact, this 
beach had once been part of a Club Med, because their 
beachside bar still existed. We slept there every day 
against the backdrop of the bar’s wall, which was inscribed 
with the names of Vietnamese people who'd stopped by, 
who had survived like us. If we’d waited fifteen minutes 
longer before berthing, our feet wouldn’t have been wedged 
in the fine golden sand of this heavenly beach. Our boat 
was completely destroyed by the waves created by an 
ordinary rain that fell immediately after we disembarked. 
More than two hundred of us watched in silence, eyes misty 
from rain and astonishment. The wooden planks skipped 
one at a time on the crest of the waves, like a synchronized 
swimming routine. I’m positive that for one brief moment the 
sight made believers of us all. Except one man. He’d 
retraced his steps to fetch the gold taels he’d hidden in the 
boat’s fuel tank. He never came back. Perhaps the taels 
made him sink, perhaps they were too heavy to carry. Or 
else the current swallowed him as punishment for looking 
back, or to remind us that we must never regret what we’ve 
left behind. 



That memory definitely explains why I never leave a place 
with more than one suitcase. I take only books. Nothing 
else can become truly mine. I sleep just as well in a hotel 
room, a guest room or a stranger’s bed as in my own. In 
fact, I’m always glad to move; it gives me a chance to 
lighten my belongings, to leave objects behind so that my 
memory can become truly selective, can remember only 
images that stay luminous behind my closed eyelids. I 
prefer to remember the flutters in my stomach, my light¬ 
headedness, my upheavals, my hesitations, my lapses ... I 
prefer them because I can shape them according to the 
colour of time, whereas an object remains inflexible, frozen, 
unwieldy. 



I love men in the same way, without wanting them to be 
mine. That way, I am one among others, without a role to 
play, without existing. I don’t need their presence because I 
don’t miss those who are absent. They’re always replaced 
or replaceable. If they’re not, my feelings for them are. For 
that reason, I prefer married men, their hands dressed in 
gold rings. I like those hands on my body, on my breasts. I 
like them because, despite the mixture of odours, despite 
the dampness of their skin on mine, despite the occasional 
euphoria, those ring fingers with their histories keep me 
remote, aloof, in the shadows. 



I forget the details of how I felt during these encounters. I 
do remember fleeting gestures, such as Guillaume's finger 
brushing against my left baby toe to write his initial G; the 
drop of sweat from Mikhail’s chin falling onto my first lumbar 
vertebra; the cavity at the bottom of Simon’s breastbone, 
Simon who told me that if I murmured into the well of his 
pectus excavatum, my words would resonate all the way to 
his heart. 

Over the years, I’ve collected a fluttering eyelash from 
one, a stray lock of hair from another, lessons from some, 
silences from several, an afternoon here, an idea there—to 
form just one lover, because I’ve neglected to memorize the 
face of each one. Together, these men taught me how to 
become a lover, how to be in love, how to long for an 
amorous state. It’s my children, though, who have taught me 
the verb to love, who have defined it. If I had known what it 
meant to love, I wouldn’t have had children, because once 
we love, we love forever, like Uncle Two’s wife, Step-aunt 
Two, who can’t stop loving her gambler son, the son who is 
burning up the family fortune like a pyromaniac. 



w hen I was younger, I saw Step-aunt Two prostrate 
herself before Buddha, before Jesus, before her son, to 
plead with him not to go away for months at a time, not to 
come back from those months of absence escorted by men 
holding a knife to his throat. Before I became a mother, I 
couldn't understand how she, a businesswoman with 
clenched fists, keen eyes, a sharp tongue, could believe all 
the lying tales and promises of her gambler son. During my 
recent visit to Saigon, she told me she must have been a 
serious criminal in her former life, if she was obliged, in this 
life, to constantly believe the deceptions of her son. She 
wanted to stop loving. She was tired of loving. 

Because I had become a mother, I lied to her too by 
remaining silent about the night her son took my child’s 
hand and wrapped it around his adolescent penis, and 
about the night when he slipped inside the mosquito net of 
Aunt Seven, the one who is mentally retarded, defenceless. 
I shut my mouth to keep my aging, worn-out step-aunt Two 
from dying because she had loved so much. 



/Aunt Seven is my maternal grandmother’s sixth child. Her 
number, seven, didn’t bring the good luck it was supposed 
to. When I was a child, Aunt Seven sometimes waited for 
me at the door holding a wooden spatula, ready to hit me 
as hard as she could to drive out the heat that was stored in 
her body. She was always hot. She needed to cry out, to 
fling herself onto the floor, to let off steam by hitting. As 
soon as she started howling, all the servants ran through the 
house, leaving their bucket of water, their knife, their kettle, 
their dust cloth, their broom along the way, and came to 
hold her down. To this tumult were added the cries of my 
grandmother, my mother, my other aunts, their children and 
my own. We were a twenty-voice choir nearly hysterical, 
nearly mad. After a while we no longer knew why we were 
howling, because the original cry, Aunt Seven’s, had been 
muffled by our own noise for so long. But everyone went on 
crying, taking advantage of the opportunity to do so. 

Sometimes, instead of waiting for me at the door, Aunt 
Seven would open it after stealing the keys from my 
grandmother. She would open it so she could leave us and 
end up at large in the alleyways, where her handicap wasn’t 
visible, or was at least ignored. Some ignored her 
handicap by accepting her twenty-four-carat-gold necklace 
in exchange for a piece of guava, or by having sex with her 
in exchange for a compliment. Some even hoped that she 
would become pregnant so they could make the baby the 
object of blackmail. At that time, my aunt and 1 were the 
same mental age, we were friends who told each other 
what scared us. We shared our stories. Today, my 
handicapped aunt thinks of me as an adult, so she doesn’t 
tell me about her escapes or her old stories from the 
alleyways. 

I too dreamed of being outside, playing hopscotch with 
the neighbourhood children. I envied them through the 



wrought iron grilles over our windows or from our balconies. 
Our house was surrounded by cement walls two metres 
high with shards of broken glass embedded in them to 
discourage intruders. From where I stood, it was hard to 
say if the wall existed to protect us or to remove our access 
to life. 

The alleys were swarming with children skipping, with 
ropes braided out of hundreds of multicoloured rubber 
bands. My favourite toy wasn’t a doll that said, “I love you.” 
My dream toy was a small wooden chair with a built-in 
drawer where the street vendors kept their money, and also 
the two big baskets they carried at either end of a long 
bamboo pole balanced on their shoulders. These women 
sold all kinds of soups. They walked between the two 
weights: on one side, a large cauldron of broth and a coal 
fire to keep it hot; on the other, the bowls, chopsticks, rice 
noodles and condiments. Sometimes the vendor might 
even have a baby hanging from her back. Each merchant 
advertised her wares with a particular melody. 

Years later, in Hanoi a French friend of mine would get up 
at five in the morning to record their songs. He told me that 
before long those sounds would no longer be heard on the 
streets, that those strolling merchants would give up their 
baskets for factory work. So he would safeguard their 
voices reverently and ask me to translate them along the 
way, then he would list them by category: merchants selling 
soup, selling cream of soya, buyers of glass for recycling, 
knife-grinders, masseurs for men, bread-sellers ... We 
spent whole afternoons working on translations. With my 
friend, I learned that music comes from the voice, the 
rhythm and the heart of each person, and that the musicality 
of those unrecorded melodies could lift the curtain of fog, 
pass through windows and screens to waken us as gently 
as a morning lullaby. 

He had to get up early to record them because the soups 
were sold mainly in the morning. Each soup had its own 



vermicelli: round ones with beef, small and flat with pork 
and shrimp, transparent with chicken ... Each woman had 
her specialty and her route. When Marie-France, my 
teacher in Granby, asked me to describe my breakfast, I 
told her: soup, vermicelli, pork. She asked me again, more 
than once, miming waking up, rubbing her eyes and 
stretching. But my reply was the same, with a slight 
variation: rice instead of vermicelli. The other Vietnamese 
children gave similar descriptions. She called home then to 
check the accuracy of our answers with our parents. As 
time went on, we no longer started our day with soup and 
rice. To this day, I haven’t found a substitute. So it’s very 
rare that I have breakfast. 



I went back to having soup for breakfast when I was 
pregnant with my son Pascal, in Vietnam. I didn’t crave 
pickles or peanut butter, just a bowl of soup with vermicelli 
purchased on a street corner. Throughout my childhood, my 
grandmother forbade us to eat those soups because the 
bowls were washed in a tiny bucket of water. It was 
impossible for the vendors to carry water on their shoulders 
as well as the broth and the bowls. Whenever it was 
possible, they would ask people for some clean water. As a 
small child, I often waited for them at the fence near the 
kitchen door with fresh water for their buckets. I would have 
traded my blue-eyed doll for their wooden chairs. I should 
have suggested it, because today they've been replaced by 
plastic chairs, which are lighter, don’t have a built-in drawer, 
and don’t show the traces of fatigue and wear in their grain 
as wooden benches do. The merchants stepped into the 
modern era still carrying the weight of the yoke on their 
shoulders. 



The trace of the red and yellow stripes of a Pom 
sandwich-bread bag is burned into one side of our first 
toaster. Our sponsors in Granby had placed that small 
appliance at the top of the list of essentials to buy when we 
moved into our first apartment. For years we lugged that 
toaster from one place to the next without ever using it, 
because our breakfast was rice, soup, leftovers from the 
night before. Quietly, we started eating Rice Krispies, 
without milk. My brothers followed this with toast and jam. 
Every morning for twenty years, without exception, the 
youngest breakfasted on two slices of sandwich bread with 
butter and strawberry jam, no matter where he was posted 
—New York, New Delhi, Moscow or Saigon. His 
Vietnamese maid tried to make him change his habits by 
offering him steaming balls of sticky rice covered with 
freshly grated coconut, roasted sesame seeds and peanuts 
crushed in a mortar, or a piece of warm baguette with ham 
spread with homemade mayonnaise, or pate de foie 
decorated with a sprig of coriander... He brushed them all 
aside and went back to his sandwich bread, which he kept 
in the freezer. During my latest visit to him I discovered that 
he keeps our old stained toaster in a cupboard. It's the only 
trinket he has carted with him from country to country as if it 
were an anchor, or the memory of dropping the first anchor. 



I discovered my own anchor when I went to meet 
Guillaume at Hanoi airport. The scent of Bounce fabric 
softener on his T-shirt made me cry. For two weeks I slept 
with a piece of Guillaume’s clothing on my pillow. 
Guillaume, for his part, was dazzled by the scent of jackfruit, 
kumquats, durians, carambola, of bitter melons, field crabs, 
dried shrimp, of lilies, lotus and herbs. Several times he 
went to the night market where vegetables, fruit and flowers 
were traded back and forth between the baskets of the 
vendors negotiating among themselves in a noisy but 
controlled chaos, as if they were on the floor of the Stock 
Exchange. I would go to this night market with Guillaume, 
always with one of his pullovers over my shirt because I'd 
discovered that my home could be summed up as an 
ordinary, simple odour from my daily North American life. I 
had no street address of my own, I lived in an office 
apartment in Hanoi. My books were stored at Aunt Eight’s 
place, my diplomas at my parents’ in Montreal, my photos 
at my brothers’, my winter coats with my former roommate. I 
realized for the first time that Bounce, the smell of Bounce, 
had given me my first attack of homesickness. 



During my early years in Quebec, my clothes smelled of 
damp or of food because after they were washed they were 
hung up in our bedrooms on lines strung from wall to wall. 
At night, every night, my last image was of colours 
suspended across the room like Tibetan prayer flags. For 
years I inhaled the scent of fabric softener on my 
classmates’ clothes when the wind carried it to me. I 
happily breathed in the bags of used clothes we received. It 
was the only smell I wanted. 



Guillaume left Hanoi after staying with me for two weeks. 
He had no clean clothes to leave me. Over the following 
months, I received in the mail now and then a tightly sealed 
plastic envelope with a freshly dried handkerchief inside, 
smelling of Bounce. The last package he sent me 
contained a plane ticket for Paris. When I arrived, he was 
waiting to take me to an appointment with a perfumer. He 
wanted me to smell a violet leaf, an iris, blue cypress, 
vanilla, lovage ... and, most of all, everlasting, an aroma of 
which Napoleon said smelled of his country before he even 
set foot on it. Guillaume wanted me to find an aroma that 
would give me my country, my world. 



I ‘ve never worn any other perfume than the one that was 
created for me at Guillaume's request during that trip to 
Paris. It replaced Bounce. It speaks for me and reminds me 
that I exist. One of my roommates spent several years 
studying theology and archaeology in order to understand 
who our creator is, who we are, why we exist. Every night, 
she came back to the apartment not with answers but with 
new questions. I never had any questions except the one 
about the moment when I could die. I should have chosen 
the moment before the arrival of my children, for since then 
I've lost the option of dying. The sharp smell of their sun¬ 
baked hair, the smell of sweat on their backs when they 
wake from a nightmare, the dusty smell of their hands when 
they leave a classroom, meant that I have to live, to be 
dazzled by the shadow of their eyelashes, moved by a 
snowflake, bowled over by a tear on their cheek. My 
children have given me the exclusive power to blow on a 
wound to make the pain disappear, to understand words 
unpronounced, to possess the universal truth, to be a fairy. 
A fairy smitten with the way they smell. 



Wyatt was smitten with the ao dai because that outfit 
makes women’s bodies look gorgeously delicate and 
tremendously romantic. One day he took me to a grand villa 
hidden behind rows of kiosks built on the ground where the 
garden had once stood. The villa was home to two aging 
sisters who were quietly selling off their furniture to 
collectors to ensure their day-to-day survival. Wyatt was 
their most faithful customer, so we were invited to recline on 
a big mahogany daybed like the one my paternal 
grandfather had, resting our heads on the ceramic cushions 
where opium smokers once lay. The owner brought us tea 
and slices of candied ginger. A slight breeze lifted the tails 
of her ao dai when she bent over to set the cups between 
Wyatt and me. Although she was sixty years old, the 
sensuality of her ao dai touched us. The one square 
centimetre of skin that was revealed mocked the ravages 
of time: it still made our hearts leap. Wyatt said that the 
diminutive space was his golden triangle, his isle of 
happiness, his own private Vietnam. Between sips of tea 
he whispered: It stirs my soul.” 



w hen soldiers from the North arrived in Saigon, they too 
were stirred by that triangle of skin. They were troubled by 
the schoolgirls in white ao dais, bursting out of their school 
like butterflies in spring. And so wearing the ao dai was 
soon forbidden. It was banned because it cast aspersions 
on the heroism of the women in green kepis who appeared 
on enormous billboards at every street corner, in khaki 
shirts with sleeves rolled up on their muscular arms. They 
were right to banish the outfit. It took three times as long to 
button it than to take it off. One brisk movement was 
enough to make the snap fasteners pop open. My 
grandmother took not three but ten times longer to put on 
the tunic, because after giving birth to ten children her body 
had to be sculpted, redrawn with a girdle that had thirty 
hooks and eyes, to respect the cut of that hypocritically 
modest and deceptively candid garment. 



Today, my grandmother is a very old woman, but still 
beautiful, lavishly so, like a queen. When she was in her 
forties, sitting in her parlour in Saigon, she epitomized a 
whole era of an extreme kind of beauty of opulence. Every 
morning a cohort of merchants waited at the door to 
present their finds to her. Most of them already knew her 
requirements. They brought new crockery, plastic flowers 
just arrived from Europe and, inevitably, brassieres for her 
six daughters. As the country was at war, and the market 
unstable, it was best to anticipate everything. Sometimes it 
was diamonds. All the Vietnamese women in our circle had 
a loupe for examining diamonds. I had learned very young 
to spot inclusions in diamonds, because it was a skill 
necessary for dealing with family finances. As the banking 
system was weak and transitory, women had to master the 
art of buying and selling gold and diamonds to manage 
their savings. My grandmother spent days at a time running 
errands without ever moving. In the midst of the sellers’ 
visits, she also entertained friends or interviewed servants 
looking for work. 

My grandmother’s days were filled with these mundane 
tasks. And while she was a believer, she didn’t have time to 
sit in front of Buddha. After the markets had been cleaned 
out of merchandise and merchants, after her Communist 
tenants had taken the contents of her safe and her lace 
scarves, she learned to dress in the long grey kimono worn 
by the faithful. Despite her salt-and-pepper hair, which she 
quite simply smoothed and tied into a bun just above the 
nape of her neck, she was still stunningly beautiful. She 
said her prayers at all hours of the day, in the smoke of 
incense sticks, waiting for word from her children who'd 
gone to sea. She’d let her two youngest, a boy and a girl, 
leave with my mother despite the uncertainty. My mother 
asked my grandmother to choose between the risk of 



losing her son at sea and that of finding him torn to shreds 
in a minefield during his military service in Cambodia. She 
had to choose secretly, without hesitating, without 
trembling, without perspiring. Perhaps it was to control her 
fear that she started to pray. Perhaps it was to become 
intoxicated with the incense smoke that she no longer left 
the altar. 



In Hanoi, I had a neighbour across the street who also 
prayed every morning, at dawn, for hours. Unlike my 
grandmother's, though, her windows made of bamboo slats 
opened directly onto the street. Her mantra and her steady 
and incessant pounding on her block of wood intruded on 
the whole neighbourhood. At first I wanted to move, lodge a 
complaint, even steal her bell and smash it to bits. After a 
few weeks, though, I stopped cursing the woman because I 
was haunted by the image of my grandmother. 

During the first years of immense upsets, my 
grandmother sometimes took refuge in temples. She 
wanted so badly to hide in them that she even allowed Aunt 
Seven to drive her. Aunt Seven didn’t know how to drive a 
moped, because no one had shown her, and also because 
she wasn’t supposed to leave the house. But the rules had 
been rewritten since the structural upheaval of her life and 
of life in general. For my handicapped aunt, that bursting of 
the family nucleus brought a kind of freedom, as well as an 
opportunity to grow up. The situation led her to start up the 
one moped that was left in the courtyard. My grandmother 
got on, and my aunt began to drive and drive, never 
changing speed, never stopping, even at red lights. She 
told me later that when she saw a traffic light she closed her 
eyes. As for my grandmother, she put her hands on her 
daughter’s shoulders and prayed. 



I would have liked Aunt Seven to tell me about how she 
had given birth while with the nuns. I don't know if she's 
aware that Aunt Four’s adopted son is actually hers. I don’t 
know how I knew. Maybe because the children listened 
through keyholes without the adults noticing. Or because 
adults aren’t always aware that children are present. The 
parents didn’t need to keep an eye on their children; they 
counted on the nannies to supervise them. But parents 
sometimes forgot that the nannies were young girls: they 
too had urges, they liked to attract the eyes of the chauffeur, 
the smile of the tailor, they liked to dream for a moment, as 
they looked at themselves in the mirror, that they too were 
part of the backdrop reflected there. 

I always had nannies, but they sometimes forgot me. And 
I don't remember any of them, even if I often find them in a 
corner, out of focus, in the photos from my childhood. 



My son Pascal also lost all memory of his nanny, Lek, 
very soon after we left Bangkok to come home to Montreal. 
Yet his Thai nanny had been with him seven days a week, 
twenty-four hours a day, for more than two years, except for 
a few days’ holiday now and then. Lek loved Pascal from 
the very first moment. She showed him off in the 
neighbourhood as if he were hers, the most beautiful, the 
most magnificent. She loved him so much I was afraid 
she’d forget that inevitably they would separate, that 
someday we were going to leave her and, sadly, my son 
might not remember her at all. 

Lek knew just a few words of English and I a few words 
of Thai, but all the same we managed to have long 
conversations about the residents of my building. The most 
cinematic image was that of the ninth-floor neighbour, an 
American in his thirties. One night he came home from 
work to find his apartment covered with feathers and moss. 
His pants had been cut in two lengthwise, his sofas ripped 
open, his tables lacerated by a knife, his curtains torn to 
shreds. All this damage was the work of the mistress he’d 
dismissed after three months of service. He shouldn’t have 
exceeded the limit of one month, because the hope of a 
great love grew in her mind every day, even though she 
continued to be paid every Friday for her loving. To avoid a 
disappointment on that scale, perhaps he shouldn’t have 
invited her to all those meals where she smiled without 
understanding anything, where she was a decoration for the 
table, where she swallowed vichyssoise while intensely 
craving a salad of green papaya with bird chilies that tore 
your mouth apart, that burned your lips, set fire to your 
heart. 



I ’ve often asked strangers who came to Asia to buy love 
on a one-time basis why, on the morning after a wild night, 
they insisted on sharing their meal with their Vietnamese or 
Thai mistress. The women would have preferred to receive 
the cost of those meals in cash, so they could buy a pair of 
shoes for their mother or a new mattress for their father, or 
to send their little brother for English lessons. Why desire 
their presence outside of bed when their vocabulary is 
limited to conversations that go on behind closed doors? 
They told me I didn't understand a thing. They needed those 
young girls for a totally different reason—to restore their 
youth. When they looked at those young girls, they saw their 
own youth, filled with dreams and possibilities. The girls 
gave them something: the illusion that they hadn’t made a 
mess of their lives, or, at the very least, the strength and the 
urge to start over. Without them they felt disillusioned, sad. 
Sad at having never loved enough and having never been 
loved enough. Disillusioned because money hadn’t brought 
them happiness, except in countries where for five dollars 
they could obtain an hour of happiness, or at least some 
affection, company, attention. For five dollars they got a 
clumsily made-up girl who came for a coffee or a beer with 
them and roared with laughter because the man had just 
said the Vietnamese word urinate instead of pepper, two 
words differentiated only by an accent, a tone that is nearly 
imperceptible to the untrained ear. A single accent for a 
single moment of happiness. 



One night, as I followed into a restaurant a man with a 
slashed earlobe like that of one of the Communist soldiers 
who’d lived in my family home in Saigon, I saw through the 
slit between two panels of a private room six girls lined up 
against the wall, teetering in their high heels, faces heavily 
made up, bodies frail, skin shivering, totally naked in the 
flickering light from the fluorescent tubes. Together, six men 
took aim at the girls, each with a tightly rolled American 
hundred-dollar bill, folded in half around a taut rubber band. 
The bills crossed the smoky room at the crazy speed of 
projectiles, finally landing on the girls’ translucent skin. 



I_/uring my first months in Vietnam, I was very flattered 

when people thought I was my boss’s escort, in spite of my 
designer suit and my high heels, because it meant that I 
was still young, slim, fragile. But after witnessing the scene 
where the girls had to bend down to pick up the hundred- 
dollar bills wadded at their feet, I stopped feeling flattered 
out of respect for them, because behind their dreamy 
bodies and their youth, they carried all the invisible weight 
of Vietnam's history, like the women with hunched backs. 

Like some of the girls whose skin was too delicate, who 
couldn’t bear the weight, I left before the third volley. I left the 
restaurant deafened not by the sound of clinking glasses 
but by the imperceptible sound of the shock of bills against 
their skin. I left the restaurant, my head filled with the 
resonance of the stoic silence of the girls who’d stayed 
behind, who had the strength to strip the money of its 
power, becoming untouchable, invincible. 



w hen I meet young girls in Montreal or elsewhere who 
injure their bodies intentionally, deliberately, who want 
permanent scars to be drawn on their skin, I can’t help 
secretly wishing they could meet other young girls whose 
permanent scars are so deep they’re invisible to the naked 
eye. I would like to seat them face to face and hear them 
make comparisons between a wanted scar and an inflicted 
scar, one that’s paid for, the other that pays off, one visible, 
the other impenetrable, one inordinately sensitive, the other 
unfathomable, one drawn, the other misshapen. 



Aunt Seven also has a scar, on her lower belly, the trace 
of one of her escapades in the maze of alleys where she 
inched her way between the vendors of ice and of slippers, 
between squabbling neighbours, angry women and men 
with erections. Which of these men was the father of her 
child? No one dared to question Aunt Seven because 
they’d had to lie to her during her pregnancy to protect her 
from her own belly by concealing it under the habit of the 
nuns at the Couvent des Oiseaux. The nuns called her 
Josette and showed her how to write her name in large 
dotted characters. Josette never knew why she was getting 
so fat or why she woke from a deep sleep to discover that 
she was thin. She only knew that Aunt Four’s adopted son 
ran away like her, as soon as he could. He criss-crossed 
the same alleys at the speed of light, holding his sandals so 
that his feet would feel the heat of the pavement, the texture 
of excrement, the sharpness of a piece of broken bottle. He 
ran all through his childhood. And all through his childhood 
we other children, young and old, ten, fifteen, even twenty of 
us, patrolled the neighbourhood every month. One day we 
all came home empty-handed, as did the servants and the 
neighbours. He left our lives along the same trail he'd 
arrived on, leaving as his only souvenir a scar above his 
mother’s pubic area. 



IVIyson Henri runs away too. He runs to the St. Lawrence 
River on the other side of a highway, of a boulevard, a 
street, a park, another street. He runs to the water where 
the smooth rhythm and the constant movement of the waves 
hypnotize him, offer him calm and protection. I’ve learned to 
be a shadow in his shadow so I can follow him without 
upsetting him, without harassing him. Once, though, it took 
just one second of distraction and I saw him dash in front of 
the cars, excited and full of life as never before. I was 
staggered by the juxtaposition of his happiness, so rare, so 
unexpected, and my own anguish at the thought of his body 
thrown up in the air above a fender. Should I close my eyes 
and slow down to avoid witnessing the impact, to survive? 
Motherhood, my own, afflicted me with a love that 
vandalized my heart, puffed it up, deflated it and expelled it 
from my rib cage when I saw my older son, Pascal, show up 
out of the blue, and fling his brother onto the freshly cut 
grass of the boulevard median. Pascal landed on his 
brother like an angel, with chubby little thighs, candy-pink 
cheeks and a tiny thumb sticking up in the air. 



I cried with joy as I took my two sons by the hand, but I 
cried as well because of the pain of that other Vietnamese 
mother who witnessed her son’s execution. An hour before 
his death, that boy was running across the rice paddy with 
the wind in his hair, to deliver messages from one man to 
another, from one hand to another, from one hiding place to 
another, to prepare for the revolution, to do his part for the 
resistance, but also, sometimes, to help send a simple love 
note on its way. 

That son was running with his childhood in his legs. He 
couldn't see the very real risk of being picked up by 
soldiers of the enemy camp. He was six years old, maybe 
seven. He couldn’t read yet. All he knew was how to hold 
tightly in his hands the scrap of paper he’d been given. 
Once he was captured, though, standing in the midst of 
rifles pointed at him, he no longer remembered where he 
was running to, or the name of the person the note was 
addressed to, or his precise starting point. Panic muted 
him. Soldiers silenced him. His frail body collapsed on the 
ground and the soldiers left, chewing their gum. His mother 
ran across the rice paddy where traces of her son’s 
footprints were still fresh. In spite of the sound of the bullet 
that had torn space open, the landscape stayed the same. 
The young rice shoots continued to be cradled by the wind, 
imperturbable in the face of the brutality of those oversized 
loves, of the pains too muted for tears to flow, for cries to 
escape from that mother who gathered up in her old mat 
the body of her son, half buried in the mud. 



I held back my cries so as not to distort the hypnotic sound 
of the sewing machines standing one behind the other in 
my parents’ garage. Like my brothers and me, my cousins 
sewed after school for pocket money. With eyes focused 
on the regular, rapid movement of the needles, we didn’t 
see one another, so that very often our conversations were 
actually confessions. My cousins were only ten years old, 
but they already had a past to recount because they’d been 
born into an exhausted Saigon and had grown up during 
Vietnam’s darkest period. They described to me, with 
mocking laughter, how they had masturbated men in 
exchange for a bowl of soup at two thousand dongs. 
Holding nothing back, they described those sex acts 
naturally and honestly, as people for whom prostitution is 
merely a question of adults and money, a matter that does 
not involve children six or seven years old like them, who 
did it in exchange for a fifteen-cent meal. I listened to them 
without turning around, still sewing, without commenting, 
because I wanted to protect the innocence in their words, 
not tarnish their candour by my interpretation of the act. It 
was certainly thanks to that innocence that they became 
engineers after ten years of studies in Montreal and 
Sherbrooke. 



Coming home after leaving my cousins at the University of 
Sherbrooke, I was approached in a gas station by a 
Vietnamese man who had recognized my vaccination scar. 
One look at that scar took him back in time and let him see 
himself as a little boy walking to school along a dirt path 
with his slate under his arm. One look at that scar and he 
knew that our eyes had already seen the yellow blossoms 
on the branches of plum trees at the front door of every 
house at New Year’s. One look at that scar brought back to 
him the delicious aroma of caramelized fish with pepper, 
simmering in an earthen pot that sat directly on the coals. 
One look at that scar and our ears heard again the sound 
produced by the stem of a young bamboo as it sliced the 
air then lacerated the skin of our backsides. One look at 
that scar and our tropical roots, transplanted onto land 
covered with snow, emerged again. In one second we had 
seen our own ambivalence, our hybrid state: half this, half 
that, nothing at all and everything at once. A single mark on 
the skin and our entire shared history was spread out 
between two gas pumps in a station by a highway exit. He 
had concealed his scar under a midnight blue dragon. I 
couldn’t see it with my naked eye. He had only to run his 
finger over my immodestly exhibited scar, however, and 
take my finger in his other hand and run it over the back of 
his dragon and immediately we experienced a moment of 
complicity, of communion. 



It was also a moment of communion when my large 
extended family got together in upstate New York to 
celebrate my grandmother’s eighty-fifth birthday. There 
were thirty-eight of us, gossiping, giggling, getting on each 
other’s nerves for two days. I noticed then for the first time 
that I had the same rounded thighs as Aunt Six and that the 
dress I had on was similar to Aunt Eight’s. 

Aunt Eight is my big sister, the one who shared with me 
the thrill of the word goddess that a man had whispered in 
her ear when she was sitting, out of my mother’s sight, on 
the crossbar of his bicycle, encircled by his arms. She is 
also the one who showed me how to capture the pleasure 
of a passing desire, of an ephemeral flattery, of a stolen 
moment. 

When my cousin Sao Mai sat behind me and embraced 
me for the cameras of her two sons, Uncle Nine smiled. 
Uncle Nine knows me better than I know myself because he 
bought me my first novel, my first theatre ticket, my first visit 
to a museum, my first journey. 



Sao Mai became an important businesswoman, a public 
personality, a modern queen after she'd beaten dozens 
and dozens of eggs by hand—there were power failures 
five days out of seven in Saigon—to make birthday cakes 
that she sold to the new Communist leaders. Like an 
acrobat, she delivered her cakes by bicycle, zigzagging 
through other bicycles, avoiding the black smoke of 
motorcycles and the manholes with covers stolen. Today 
her cakes, and now also her ice cream, pastries, chocolate 
and coffee, are sold in every neighbourhood in the big 
cities, criss-crossing the country from south to north. 



I am still the shadow of Sao Mai. But I like to be, because 
during my stay in Vietnam I was the shadow that danced 
around the bargaining tables to distract those with whom 
she was dealing while she deliberated. Because I was her 
shadow, she could confide in me her worries, her fears, her 
doubts, without compromising herself. Because I was her 
shadow, I was the only one who dared to enter her private 
life, which had been tightly sealed since the time when she 
sold "coffee” made from stale bread burned to a cinder 
then ground, on the sidewalk across from where she lived, 
ever since the windows of her house had been sold. 
Without asking permission, I relit the flames she thought 
had disappeared behind her now-massive facade. I 
cleared the way for frivolity by allowing her children to pelt 
each other with custard pies on my terrace, by putting them 
in a cardboard box full of confetti outside her room to wish 
her happy birthday when she woke up, by placing in her 
briefcase a red leather thong. 



I like the red leather of the sofa in the cigar lounge where I 
dare to strip naked in front of friends and sometimes 
strangers, without their knowledge. I recount bits of my past 
as if they were anecdotes or comedy routines or amusing 
tales from far-off lands featuring exotic landscapes, odd 
sound effects and exaggerated characterizations. When I 
sit in that smoky lounge, I forget that I’m one of the Asians 
who lack the dehydrogenase enzyme for metabolizing 
alcohol, I forget that I’m marked with a blue spot on my 
backside, like the Inuit, like my sons, like all those with 
Asian blood. I forget the mongoloid spot that reveals the 
genetic memory because it vanished during the early years 
of childhood, and my emotional memory has been lost, 
dissolving, snarling with time. 



I hat estrangement, that detachment, that distance allow 
me to buy, without any qualms and with full awareness of 
what I’m doing, a pair of shoes whose price in my native 
land would be enough to feed a family of five for one whole 
year. The salesperson just has to promise me, Youll walk 
on air, and I buy them. When we’re able to float in the air, to 
separate ourselves from our roots—not only by crossing an 
ocean and two continents but by distancing ourselves from 
our condition as stateless refugees, from the empty space 
of an identity crisis—we can also laugh at whatever might 
have happened to my acrylic bracelet the colour of the 
gums on a dental plate, the bracelet my parents had turned 
into a survival kit by hiding all their diamonds in it. Who 
would have thought, after we avoided drowning, pirates, 
dysentery, that today the bracelet could be found perfectly 
intact, buried in a garbage dump? Who would have thought 
that burglars would steal from people living in an apartment 
as miserable as ours? Who would have imagined that 
thieves would saddle themselves with a ridiculous piece of 
jewellery made of pink plastic? All the members of my 
family are convinced that the burglars tossed it aside when 
they were sorting their haul. So maybe one day, millions of 
years from now, an archaeologist will wonder why 
diamonds were arranged in a circle and placed in the 
ground. He may interpret it as a religious rite, and the 
diamonds as a mysterious offering, like all those gold taels 
discovered in amazing quantities in the depths of the South 
China Sea. 



Absolutely no one will know the true story of the pink 
bracelet once the acrylic has decomposed into dust, once 
the years have accumulated in the thousands, in hundreds 
of strata, because after only thirty years I already recognize 
our old selves only through fragments, through scars, 
through glimmers of light. 



In thirty years, Sao Mai resurfaced like a phoenix reborn 
from its ashes, like Vietnam from its iron curtain and my 
parents from the toilet bowls they had to scrub. Alone as 
much as together, all those individuals from my past have 
shaken the grime off their backs in order to spread their 
wings with plumage of red and gold, before thrusting 
themselves sharply towards the great blue space, 
decorating my children’s sky, showing them that one 
horizon always hides another and it goes on like that to 
infinity, to the unspeakable beauty of renewal, to intangible 
rapture. As for me, it is true all the way to the possibility of 
this book, to the moment when my words glide across the 
curve of your lips, to the sheets of white paper that put up 
with my trail, or rather the trail of those who have walked 
before me, for me. I moved forward in the trace of their 
footsteps as in a waking dream where the scent of a newly 
blown poppy is no longer a perfume but a blossoming: 
where the deep red of a maple leaf in autumn is no longer a 
colour but a grace; where a country is no longer a place but 
a lullaby. 



And also, where an outstretched hand is no longer a 
gesture but a moment of love, lasting until sleep, until 
waking, until everyday life. 



KIM THUY has worked as a seamstress, 
interpreter, lawyer and restaurant owner. Ru is her 
first book, has been published in 15 countries and 
received several awards, including the Governor 
General’s Literary Award. Kim Thuy currently lives 
in Montreal, where she devotes herself to writing. 


SHEILA FISCHMAN is the award-winning 
translator of some 150 contemporary novels from 
Quebec. In 2008 she was awarded the Molson 
Prize in the Arts. She is a Member of the Order of 
Canada and a chevalier de I’Ordre national du 
Quebec. She lives in Montreal. 